The Project Gutenberg eBook of The book of Enoch the Prophet
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The book of Enoch the Prophet
        Translated from an Ethiopic MS. in the Bodleian Library

Translator: Richard Laurence


        
Release date: January 30, 2026 [eBook #77815]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Kegan Paul, Trench & Co, 1883

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/77815

Credits: Brian Coe, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF ENOCH THE PROPHET ***

                     The Book of Enoch the Prophet




                     THE BOOK OF ENOCH THE PROPHET


        TRANSLATED FROM AN ETHIOPIC MS. IN THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY
                              BY THE LATE
                        RICHARD LAURENCE, LL.D.
                          ARCHBISHOP OF CASHEL


              THE TEXT NOW CORRECTED FROM HIS LATEST NOTES

 WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY THE AUTHOR OF “THE EVOLUTION OF CHRISTIANITY”


                                 LONDON
            KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH & CO., 1, PATERNOSTER SQUARE
                                  1883

(_The rights of translation and of reproduction are reserved._)




                             INTRODUCTION.


In the Authorized Version of the Epistle of Jude, we read the following
words:—

“Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold,
the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him.”[1]

Modern research sees in the Epistle of Jude a work of the second
century: but as orthodox theologians accept its contents as the inspired
utterance of an Apostle, let us diligently search the Hebrew Scriptures
for this important forecast of the second Advent of the Messiah. In vain
we turn over the pages of the sacred Canon; not even in the Apocrypha
can we trace one line from the pen of the marvellous being to whom
uninterrupted immortality is assigned by apostolic[2] interpretation of
Genesis v. 24. Were the prophecies of Enoch, therefore, accepted as a
Divine revelation on that momentous day when Jesus explained the
Scriptures, after his resurrection, to Jude and his apostolic brethren;
and have we moderns betrayed our trust by excluding an inspired record
from the Bible?

Reverting to the second century of Christianity, we find Irenæus and
Clement of Alexandria citing the Book of Enoch without questioning its
sacred character. Thus, Irenæus, assigning to the Book of Enoch an
authenticity analogous to that of Mosaic literature, affirms that Enoch,
although a man, filled the office of God’s messenger to the angels.[3]
Tertullian, who flourished at the close of the first and at the
beginning of the second century, whilst admitting that the “Scripture of
Enoch” is not received by some because it is not included in the Hebrew
Canon, speaks of the author as “the most ancient prophet, Enoch,” and of
the book as the divinely inspired autograph of that immortal patriarch,
preserved by Noah in the ark, or miraculously reproduced by him through
the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Tertullian adds, “But as Enoch has
spoken in the same scripture of the Lord, and ‘every scripture suitable
for edification is divinely inspired,’ let us reject nothing which
belongs to us. It may now seem to have been disavowed by the Jews like
all other scripture which speaks of Christ—a fact which should cause us
no surprise, as they were not to receive him, even when personally
addressed by himself.” These views Tertullian confirms by appealing to
the testimony of the Apostle Jude.[4] The Book of Enoch was therefore as
sacred as the Psalms or Isaiah in the eyes of the famous theologian, on
whom modern orthodoxy relies as the chief canonist of New Testament
scripture.

Origen (A.D. 254), in quoting Hebrew literature, assigns to the Book of
Enoch the same authority as to the Psalms. In polemical discussion with
Celsus, he affirms that the work of the antediluvian patriarch was not
accepted in the Churches as Divine; and modern theologians have
accordingly assumed that he rejected its inspiration: but the extent to
which he adopts its language and ideas discloses personal conviction
that Enoch was one of the greatest of the prophets. Thus, in his
treatise on the angels, we read: “We are not to suppose that a special
office has been assigned by mere accident to a particular angel: as to
Raphael, the work of curing and healing; to Gabriel, the direction of
wars; to Michael, the duty of hearing the prayers and supplications of
men.”[5] From what source but assumed revelation could Origen obtain and
publish these circumstantial details of ministerial administration in
heaven?

Turning to the Book of Enoch we read: “After this I besought the angel
of peace, who proceeded with me, to explain all that was concealed. I
said to him, Who are those whom I have seen on the four sides, and whose
words I have heard and written down. He replied, The first is the
merciful, the patient, the holy Michael. The second is he who presides
over every suffering and every affliction of the sons of men, the holy
Raphael. The third, who presides over all that is powerful, is Gabriel.
And the fourth, who presides over repentance and the hope of those who
will inherit eternal life, is Phanuel.”[6] We thus discover the source
of Origen’s apparently superhuman knowledge, and detect his implicit
trust in the Book of Enoch as a Divine revelation.

When primitive Christianity had freely appropriated the visions of Enoch
as the materials of constructive dogmas, this remarkable book gradually
sank into oblivion, disappeared out of Western Christendom, and was
eventually forgotten by a Church, which unconsciously perpetuated its
teaching as the miraculous revelations of Christianity.

The Book of Enoch, unknown to Europe for nearly a thousand years, except
through the fragments preserved by Georgius Syncellus (circa 792, A.D.),
was at length discovered by Bruce in Abyssinia, who brought home three
copies of the Ethiopic version in 1773, respecting which he
writes:—“Amongst the articles I consigned to the library at Paris was a
very beautiful and magnificent copy of the Prophecies of Enoch, in large
quarto; another is amongst the Books of Scripture which I brought home,
standing immediately before the Book of Job, which is its proper place
in the Abyssinian Canon; and a third copy I have presented to the
Bodleian Library at Oxford, by the hands of Dr. Douglas, the Bishop of
Carlisle.”

This priceless manuscript, destined, some day, to reveal the forgotten
source of many Christian dogmas and mysteries, rested in Bodleian
obscurity, until presented to the world through an English translation
by Dr. Laurence, Archbishop of Cashel, formerly Professor of Hebrew at
Oxford, who issued his first edition in 1821, in apparent
unconsciousness that he was giving to mankind the theological fossils
through which we, in the clearer light of our generation, may study the
“Evolution of Christianity.”

The scarcity of Archbishop Laurence’s translation, before the
publication of the second edition in 1833, produced an impression in
Germany that the work had been suppressed by its author; but this report
is contradicted in the preface to the third edition, issued in 1838, in
response to a large order from America.

The Book of Enoch excited more interest on the Continent than in
England. It was translated into German by Dr. Hoffman in 1838, into
Latin by Gfrörer in 1840, again into German by Dillmann in 1853, and has
been discussed by Weisse, Lücke, Hilgenfeld, and Kalisch, the latter of
whom uttered the prediction, that the book of Enoch “will one day be
employed as a most important witness in the history of religious
dogmas.” The day and the hour have come, the clock has struck, and in
thus publishing an edition of Archbishop Laurence’s translation of the
Book of Enoch, we place within the reach of all readers of the English
language, the means of studying the pre-Christian origin of Christian
mysteries.

Turning towards the “Preliminary Dissertation” of Archbishop Laurence,
in which he discusses, with impartial criticism and accomplished
scholarship, the origin of the Book of Enoch, we find him attaining the
important conclusions, that it was written by a Jew of the Dispersion in
his own language, whether Hebrew or the later Aramæan acquired in exile;
that the version in the hands of the author of the Epistle of Jude and
the Ante-Nicene Fathers was a Greek translation; and that the Ethiopic
edition, whether translated from Aramæan or Greek, is the same work as
that cited by the Apostle.

In attestation of the theory of an Aramaic or Syro-Chaldæan origin,
Archbishop Laurence refers to the “most ancient remains of the Cabbala
(Hebrew traditions) contained in the ‘Zohar,’ a species of philosophical
commentary upon the Law, combining theological opinions with the
allegorical subtleties of the mystical school. In this celebrated
compilation of what was long supposed to constitute the hidden wisdom of
the Jewish nation, occasional references are made to the Book of Enoch,
as a book carefully preserved from generation to generation.” Archbishop
Laurence then gives extracts from the “Zohar,” referring to important
passages in the Book of Enoch, and infers that “the authors of the
Cabbalistical remains wrote their recondite doctrines in Chaldee,” and
possessed a copy of the Book of Enoch, written in that language or in
Hebrew, “which they regarded as the genuine work of him whose name it
bore, and not as the spurious production of a later age.”

Archbishop Laurence then considers the probable date of the work, and
infers, from the quotation of Jude, that it must have been written
antecedent to the Christian era, but not before the Captivity of
Babylon, because it contains the language and imagery of Daniel, “in the
representation of the Ancient of Days coming to judgment with the Son of
man.” But since Archbishop Laurence wrote, modern criticism has
disclosed how nebulous is the date of Daniel, so that it becomes as
reasonable to assume that the author or compiler borrowed from the Book
of Enoch, as to attribute plagiarism to the pseudo-patriarch. The
learned translator, however, discovered more satisfactory proof, through
internal evidence, that the book “was written long subsequent to the
commencement, and even to the conclusion, of the Babylonian Captivity.”

That section of the Book of Enoch, extending from chapter lxxxii. to
xc., contains an allegorical narrative of the royal dynasties of Israel
and Judah, from which Archbishop Laurence constructs a history extending
from Saul to the beginning of the reign of Herod the Great, and infers
that the Book of Enoch was written “before the rise of Christianity;
most probably at an early period of the reign of Herod.” The Archbishop
adds: “That it could not have been the production of a writer who lived
after the inspired authors of the New Testament, or who was even coeval
with them, must be manifest from the quotation of St. Jude—a quotation
which proves it to have been in his time a work ascribed to Enoch
himself.”

Archbishop Laurence, furthermore, attains probability of date through
another line of argument. In chapter liv. 9, of the Book of Enoch we
read, “The chiefs of the East, among the Parthians and Medes, shall
remove kings, in whom a spirit of perturbation shall enter. They shall
hurl them from their thrones, springing as lions from their dens, and
like famished wolves into the midst of the flock.” Commenting on this
passage, Archbishop Laurence says, “Now the Parthians were altogether
unknown in history, until the 250th year before Christ, when, under the
guidance of Arsaces (the family name of all their subsequent kings) they
revolted from Antiochus Theus, the then king of Syria. It was not,
however, until the year 230 B.C. that their empire became firmly
established, when Arsaces defeated and took prisoner Seleucus
Callicinus, the Syrian monarch, and first assumed the title of King of
Parthia. By degrees they expelled the Syrian dominion from every
province over which it extended east of the Euphrates; so that from
about the year 140 B.C. their vast empire reached from the Ganges to the
Euphrates, and from the Euphrates to the Caucasus.” These facts would
therefore lead to the conclusion that the Book of Enoch was written
about the middle of the second century B.C.; but as the author adds to
the passage already cited, “They shall go up, and tread upon the land of
their elect, the land of their elect shall be before them. The
threshing-floor, the path, and the city of my righteous people shall
impede the progress of their horses,” Archbishop Laurence connects this
language with the invasion of Syria by the Parthians in the year 54
B.C., and their defeat of Anthony eighteen years later, “when the credit
of the Parthian arms was at the highest; and it is probable that about
the same period, or at least not long after, the Book of Enoch was
written.”

The question now naturally arises, How was this work of fiction accepted
within so short a period, as the genuine production of the patriarch
Enoch? The Archbishop answers by showing, through internal evidence,
that the book was written by a Jew residing at a distance from
Palestine, and having been brought into Judæa in the name of the prophet
Enoch, the obscurity of its origin caused some to accept it as the
genuine production of the patriarch himself. In chapter lxxi.
Pseudo-Enoch divides the day and night into eighteen parts, and
represents the longest day in the year as consisting of twelve out of
these eighteen parts. “Now the proportion of twelve to eighteen is
precisely the same as sixteen to four and twenty, the present division
in hours of the period constituting day and night. If therefore we
consider in what latitude a country must be situated to have a day of
sixteen hours long, we shall immediately perceive that Palestine could
not be such a country. We may then safely conclude that the region in
which the author lived must have been situated not lower than forty-five
degrees north latitude, where the longest day is fifteen hours and a
half, nor higher perhaps than forty-nine degrees, where the longest day
is precisely sixteen hours. This will bring the country where he wrote,
as high up at least as the northern districts of the Caspian and Euxine
seas; probably it was situated somewhere between the upper parts of both
these seas; and if the latter conjecture be well founded, the author of
the Book of Enoch was perhaps a member of one of the tribes which
Shalmaneser carried away, and placed ‘in Halah and in Habor by the river
Goshen, and in the cities of the Medes,’ and who never returned from
captivity.”

Since Archbishop Laurence wrote his “Preliminary Dissertation,” fresh
light has been thrown on the origin of the Book of Enoch through the
publication of Mr. Layard’s “Nineveh and Babylon,” recording the
discovery, in Babylonian ruins, of cups or bowls of terra cotta, covered
on the inner surface with inscriptions in ink, which have been
deciphered by Mr. Thomas Ellis of the Manuscript Department in the
British Museum, as amulets or charms against evil spirits, disease,
calamity, and sudden death, composed in the Chaldean language mingled
with Hebrew words,[7] and written in characters which combine Syriac and
Palmyrene with the ancient Phœnician. These inscriptions are undated;
but Mr. Ellis attained the conclusion through internal evidence, that
these cups belonged to the descendants of the Jews who were carried
captive to Babylon and the surrounding cities.

But the most important revelation attained through these discoveries of
Mr. Layard lies in the interesting fact, mentioned in his work, that the
names of the angels inscribed on these cups, and those recorded in the
Book of Enoch, are, in many instances identical, so that no doubt
remains as to the Hebrew-Chaldee origin of that great Semitic work,
whether assignable to human genius or Divine revelation; and the exhumed
amulets of Jews of the Dispersion attest the accuracy of Archbishop
Laurence’s conclusions respecting the nationality of Pseudo-Enoch.

Ignorance of the contents of the Apocrypha, as canonized by the Church
of Rome, is so general in England that many otherwise well-informed
people imagine that the Book of Enoch may be found in its pages, whereas
it has been lost to all English readers, except those who may possess or
have access to copies of the English translation last issued in 1838. On
this aspect of the question Archbishop Laurence writes:—

“The fate of the Apocryphal writings in general has been singular. On
one side, from the influence of theological opinion or theological
caprice, they have been sometimes injudiciously admitted into the Canon
of Scripture; while on the other side, from an over-anxiety to preserve
that Canon inviolate, they have been not simply rejected, but loaded
with every epithet of contempt and obloquy. The feelings perhaps of both
parties have on such occasions run away with their judgment. For
writings of this description, whatever may or may not be their claim to
inspiration, are at least of considerable utility, where they indicate
the theological opinions of the periods at which they were composed.
This I apprehend to be peculiarly the case of the Book of Enoch; which,
as having been manifestly written before the doctrines of Christianity
were promulgated to the world, must afford us, when it refers to the
nature and character of the Messiah, as it repeatedly does so refer,
credible proof of what were the Jewish opinions upon those points before
the birth of Christ; and consequently before the possible predominance
of the Christian creed.”

Archbishop Laurence thus clearly recognized that the visions of Enoch
preceded the teaching of Jesus; but it was not given to him, or to his
generation, to see how deeply his conclusions affected the supernatural
claims of Christianity.

Turning to the contents of the Book of Enoch, the first six chapters
announce the condemnation of transgressors and the blessings of the
righteous, through the triumphal advent of the Messiah, forecast in the
famous prediction quoted by the author of the Epistle attributed to
Jude.

Chapters vii. to xvi. record the descent of two hundred angels on the
earth, their selection of wives, the birth of their gigantic offspring,
and the instruction of mankind in the manufacture of offensive and
defensive weapons, the fabrication of mirrors, the workmanship of
jewellery, and the use of cosmetics and dyes, combined with lessons in
sorcery, astrology, divination, and astronomy—all which Tertullian
accepts as Divine revelation, when he denounces woman as the “devil’s
gateway,”[8] and assures her, on the authority of the inspired Enoch,
that Tyrian dyes, Phrygian embroidery, Babylonian cloth, golden
bracelets, gleaming pearls, flashing onyx-stones, and brilliant
emeralds, with all the other adjuncts of an elegant toilette, are the
special gifts of fallen angels to female frailty. The advent of the
angels multiplies transgressions on earth, they are condemned to “the
lowest depths of the fire in torments,” and Enoch, as the messenger of
God, announces to them the eternity of their punishment.

Chapters xvii. to xxxvi. give a graphic description of the miraculous
journeys of Enoch in the company of an angel, from whom he learns the
secrets of creation and the mysteries of Infinity. From the top of a
lofty mountain “which reached to heaven,” he beheld the receptacles of
light, thunder, and lightning, “the great darkness or mountains of gloom
which constitute winter, the mouths of rivers and of the deep, _the
stone which supports the corners of the earth_, and the four winds which
bear up the earth, and constitute the pillars of heaven.”[9] Is not this
obviously the inspired cosmology, through which the author of the Book
of Enoch unconsciously condemned mediæval physicists to the stake for
impiously proclaiming the mobility of the earth? If an inspired prophet
saw the stone which supports the corners of the earth, how inexpiable
the guilt of men, who fostered scepticism through the heliocentric
theory of a world coursing swiftly round the sun!

But had not the Book of Enoch disappeared for centuries out of Europe,
before the persecution of Galileo and the martyrdom of Bruno? We answer
that its teaching had survived, as numerous other superstitions have
passed from generation to generation long after all knowledge of their
origin has been lost to the theologians who accept them as Divine.

In the “Evolution of Christianity” we cite the following passage from
Irenæus: “It is impossible that the Gospels can be more or less than
they are. For as there are four zones in the world which we inhabit, and
four principal winds, while the Church is spread abroad throughout the
earth, and the pillar and basis of the Church is the gospel and the
spirit of life, it is right that she should have four pillars exhaling
immortality on every side, and bestowing renewed vitality on men. From
which _fact_ it follows that the Word has given us four versions of the
Gospel, united by one spirit.” We now recognize that this fanciful
theory of a limited number of Evangelists is based on the cosmology of
Enoch; and if in the second century, Irenæus accepted the visions of an
antediluvian patriarch as _facts_, the traditional survival of the
earth’s “corner stone” doubtless controlled the orthodox astronomy of
mediæval theologians.

Proceeding on his journey with the angel Uriel, Enoch furthermore beheld
the prison of the fallen angels, in which struggling columns of fire
ascended from an appalling abyss. He saw the regions in which the
spirits of the dead await the day of judgment; he looked upon the trees
of knowledge and of life, exhaling fragrant odours from leaves which
never withered, and from fruit which ever bloomed; and he beheld the
“great and glorious wonder” of the celestial stars, coming forth through
the “gates of heaven.”

Chapters xxxvii. to lxxi. record the second vision of wisdom, divided
into three parables. The first depicts the future happiness and glory of
the elect, whom Enoch beheld reclining on couches in the habitations of
angels, or standing in thousands of thousands and myriads of myriads
before the throne of God, blessing and glorifying Him with celestial
song, as the Holy, Holy Lord of spirits, before whom righteousness
eternally dwells.

As Enoch uttered his prophecies respecting the elect, before the
existence of Christianity, it is important to learn in what sense he
understood the doctrine of election. The language of the first parable
happily leaves no room for doubt—“The righteous will be elected for
their good works duly weighed by the Lord of Spirits.”[10] Election,
therefore, traced to its original source, means nothing more than Divine
“selection of the fittest”—a theory more consistent with the justice of
God, than the capricious choice of the metamorphical potter, whose
arbitrary fashioning of plastic clay symbolized, in Pauline theology,
the doctrine of predestination.

The second parable (xlv.-lv.) demands the absorbed attention of modern
Jews and Gentiles; for it is either the inspired forecast of a great
Hebrew prophet, predicting with miraculous accuracy the future teaching
of Jesus of Nazareth, or the Semitic romance from which the latter
borrowed His conceptions of the triumphant return of the Son of man, to
occupy a judicial throne in the midst of rejoicing saints and trembling
sinners, expectant of everlasting happiness or eternal fire: and whether
these celestial visions be accepted as human or Divine, they have
exercised so vast an influence on the destinies of mankind for nearly
two thousand years, that candid and impartial seekers after religious
truth can no longer delay inquiry into the relationship of the Book of
Enoch with the revelation, or the evolution, of Christianity.

The third parable (lvi.-lxx.) recurs, with glowing eloquence, to the
inexhaustible theme of Messianic glory, and again depicts the happy
future of the righteous in contrast with the appalling misery of the
wicked. It also records the supernatural control of the elements,
through the action of individual angels presiding over the winds, the
sea, hail, frost, dew, the lightning’s flash, and reverberating thunder.
The names of the principal fallen angels are also given, among whom we
recognize some of the invisible powers named in the incantations
inscribed on the terra cotta cups of Hebrew-Chaldee conjuration.

Chapters lxxi. to lxxxi. contain the “book of the revolutions of the
luminaries of heaven,” the sun, the moon, and the stars, controlled in
their movements by the administration of angels. In commenting on this
section of the Book of Enoch, Archbishop Laurence says, “This system of
astronomy is precisely that of an untutored, but accurate observer of
the heavens. He describes the eastern and western parts of heaven, where
the sun and moon rise and set, as divided each into six different gates,
through which those orbs of light pass at their respective periods. In
the denomination of these gates he begins with that through which the
sun passes at the winter solstice; and this he terms the _first_ gate.
It of course answers to the sign of Capricornus; and is the southernmost
point to which the sun reaches, both at rising and setting. The next
gate, at which the sun arrives in its progress towards the east at
rising, and towards the west at setting, and which answers to the sign
of Aquarius, he terms the _second_ gate. The next, in continuation of
the same course of the sun, which answers to the sign of Pisces, he
terms the _third_ gate. The _fourth_ gate in his description is that
which is situated due east at sun-rising, and due west at sun-setting,
and which, answering to the sign of Aries, the sun enters at the vernal
equinox. With this _fourth_ gate he commences his account of the sun’s
annual circuit, and of the consequent change in the length of day and
night at the various seasons of the year. His _fifth_ gate is now to be
found in the sun’s progress northwards, and answers to the sign of
Taurus. And his _sixth_ gate is situated still further north; which,
answering to the sign of Gemini, concludes at the most northern point of
heaven to which the sun arrives, and from which it turns at the summer
solstice, again to measure back its course southwards.

“Hence it happens, that the same gates which answers to the six signs
alluded to in the sun’s passage from the winter to the summer solstice,
necessarily also answer to the remaining six of the twelve signs of the
Zodiac in its passage back again.

“The turning of the sun both at the winter and summer solstices, the
first at the most southern, the last at the most northern point of its
progress, must have always struck the eye of those who contemplated the
variety as well as the splendour of its daily appearance. The astronomy
of the apocryphal Enoch was perhaps formed in this respect upon the same
principles as the astronomy of Homer, who places the situation of the
island Συρίη under the _turning of the sun_, ὅθι τροπαὶ ἠελίοιο (Odyss.
lib. xv. 404).”

Chapters lxxxiii. to lxxxix. contain a vision of Enoch giving an
allegorical forecast of the history of the world up to the kingdom of
the Messiah.

Chapter xcii. records a series of prophecies extending from Enoch’s own
time to about one thousand years beyond the present generation. In the
system of chronology adopted, a day stands for hundred, and a week for
seven hundred years. Reference is made to the deluge, the call of
Abraham, the Mosaic dispensation, the building and the destruction of
the Temple of Solomon—events which preceded the date at which the Book
of Enoch was probably written: but when the author, in his character of
a divinely inspired seer, extends his vision beyond the horizon of his
own age, he discloses the vanity of his predictive pretensions, through
prophecies which remain unfulfilled. If, however, the Book of Enoch had
reached us through the Western, as well as the Ethiopic Canon,
apologetic theologians would doubtless affirm that centuries are but
trifles in prophetic time; and that the predictions of the great
antediluvian prophet shall, sooner or later, attain miraculous
fulfilment.

Chapters xciii. to civ. contain the eloquent exhortations of Enoch,
addressed to his children, in which he follows Buddha in commending the
“Paths of Righteousness,” and anticipates Jesus in pronouncing the doom
of sinners and the joys of saints, and gives utterance to the most
emphatic assurance of immortality which has ever flowed from human lips:
“Fear not, ye souls of the righteous, but wait with patient hope for the
day of your death in righteousness. Grieve not because your souls
descend in trouble and sorrow to the receptacle of the dead; for great
joy shall be yours, like that of the angels in heaven. And when you die,
sinners say concerning you, ‘As we die the righteous die. What profit
have they in their works? Behold, like us, they expire in sorrow and in
darkness. What advantage have they over us? Henceforward are we equal;
for behold they are dead, and never will they again perceive the light.’
But now I swear to you, ye righteous ... that I comprehend this mystery;
that I have read the tablet of heaven, have seen the writing of the holy
ones, and have discovered what is written and impressed on it concerning
you. I have seen that all goodness, joy, and glory have been prepared
for you.... The spirits of you who die in righteousness shall exist and
rejoice; and their remembrance shall be before the face of the Mighty
One from generation to generation.”[11] How profound the impression
necessarily produced on the Semitic imagination by this impassioned
language, uttered in an age of faith in inspired dreams and celestial
visions by a supposed visitant of the unseen world, who had conversed
with angels in the presence of the Lord of spirits!

The final chapter of the Book of Enoch records the birth of Noah, and
the further prophecies of Enoch, addressed to Methuselah on the subject
of the birth of Noah and the future deluge.

In attestation of the relationship between the Book of Enoch and
Christianity, we now collate its language and ideas with parallel
passages in New Testament scripture.


                          Transcriber’s Note:

The following readings were originally printed side-by-side, the Enoch
reading to the left and the New Testament reading(s) to the right. They
are transcribed in this e-book one after another, with the New Testament
readings indented, so as to be readable on modern reading devices, which
often cannot handle multiple columns.


En. lxiv. 4. “And a voice was heard from heaven.”


    Matt. iii. 17. “And lo, a voice from heaven, saying.”


En. vi. 9. “The elect shall possess light, joy, and peace, and they
shall inherit the earth.”


    Matt. v. 5. “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
    earth.”


En. l. 2, 4, 5. “He shall select the righteous and holy from among them;
for the day of their salvation has approached ... and they shall become
angels in heaven. Their countenances shall be bright with joy.... The
earth shall rejoice; and the elect possess it.”


    Luke xxi. 28. “Your redemption draweth nigh.”

    Matt. xxii. 30. “In the resurrection ... they are as the angels of
    God in heaven.”

    Matt. xiii. 43. “Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in
    the kingdom of their Father.”


En. xciii. 7. “Those, too, who acquire gold and silver, shall justly and
suddenly perish. Woe to you who are rich, for in your riches have you
trusted; but from your riches you shall be removed.”


    James v. 1. “Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries
    that shall come upon you.”

    Luke vi. 24. “Woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
    consolation.”


En. xcvi. 6, 7, 25. “Woe unto you, sinners, who say, ‘We are rich,
possess wealth, and have acquired everything which we can desire. Now
then will we do whatsoever we are disposed to do; for we have amassed
silver; our barns are full.’... They shall surely die suddenly.”


    Luke xii. Compare the parable of the rich man whose barns were full,
    and who said to himself, “Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for
    many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said
    unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee.”


En. cv. 26. “And I will place each of them on a throne of glory, of
glory peculiarly his own.”


    Matt. xix. 28. “Ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the
    twelve tribes of Israel.”


En. lxii. 11. “In his judgments he pays no respect to persons.”


    Rom. ii. 11. “For there is no respect of persons with God.”


En. xxxviii. 2. “Where will the habitation of sinners be ... who have
rejected the Lord of spirits. It would have been better for them, had
they never been born.”


    Matt. xxvi. 24. “Woe unto that man through whom the Son of man is
    betrayed! It would be good for that man if he had not been born.”


En. xix. 2. “So that they sacrifice to devils as to Gods.”


    1 Cor. x. 20. “The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
    sacrifice to devils, and not to God.”


En. xxii. 10, 12. (The angel Raphael addressing Enoch in the region of
the dead:) “Here their souls are separated ... by a chasm.”


    Luke xvi. 26 (Abraham addressing Dives from the region of the
    blessed:) “Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed.”


En. xxxix. 3, 4, 7. “A cloud then snatched me up ... placing me at the
extremity of the heavens. There I saw another vision. I saw the
habitations and couches of the saints ... with the angels ... under the
wings of the Lord of spirits. All the holy and the elect sung before
him, in appearance like a blaze of fire, their mouths being full of
blessings, and their lips glorifying the name of the Lord of spirits.”


    2 Cor. xii. “I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I
    knew a man in Christ ... caught up to the third heaven, ... whether
    in the body or out of the body I cannot tell: God knoweth. How that
    he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which
    it is not lawful for a man to utter.”

    Rev. xix. 1. “I heard a great voice of much people in heaven,
    saying, Alleluia, salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto
    the Lord our God.”


En. xlvi. 2. “This is the Son of man ... who will reveal all the
treasures of that which is concealed.”


    Col. ii. 3. “In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
    knowledge.”


En. ix. 3, 4. “Then they said to their Lord, the King: Thou art Lord of
lords, God of gods, King of kings. The throne of thy glory is for ever
and ever, and for ever and ever is thy name sanctified and glorified.
Thou art blessed and glorified. Thou hast made all things; thou
possessest power over all things: and all things are open and manifest
before thee. Thou beholdest all things, and nothing can be concealed
from thee.”


    Rev. xvii. 14; xix. 16. “King of kings, and Lord of lords.”

    Rev. iv. 11. “Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honour,
    and power; for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure
    they are, and were created.”

    Heb. iv. 13. “Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in
    his sight; but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him
    with whom we have to do.”


En. xxiv. 11, 10. “I blessed the Lord of glory, the everlasting King,
because He has prepared this tree for the saints, formed it, and
declared that he would give it to them.... The sweet odour shall enter
into their bones; and they shall live a long life on the earth, as thy
forefathers have lived; neither in their days shall sorrow, distress,
and punishment afflict them.”


    Rev. xxii. 2. “On either side of the river was a tree of life, which
    bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded its fruit every month; and
    the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.”

    Rev. ii. 7. “To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree
    of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.”

    Rev. xxii. 14. “Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they
    may have the right to the tree of life.”


En. lxxxv. 2. “And behold a single star fell from heaven.”


    Rev. ix. 1. “I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth.”


En. lx. 13. “All the angels of power.”


    2 Thess. i. “The angels of His power.”


En. x. 15, 16. “To Michael also, the Lord said, Go and announce his
crime to Samyaza and to the others who are with him who have been
associated with women.... Bind them for seventy generations underneath
the earth, even to the day of judgment, and of consummation, until the
judgment, which shall last for ever, be completed. Then shall they be
taken away into the lowest depths of the fire in torments, and in
confinement shall they be shut up for ever.”


    Jude 6. “The angels which kept not their first estate, but left
    their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under
    darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.”

    2 Pet. ii. 4. “God spared not the angels when they sinned, but cast
    them down to hell, and committed them to pits of darkness, to be
    reserved unto judgment.”

    Rev. xx. 10. “The devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of
    fire and brimstone, ... and shall be tormented day and night for
    ever.”


En. xxi. 56. “I beheld columns of fire struggling together to the end of
the abyss, and deep was their descent. But neither its measurement nor
magnitude was I able to discover.... Uriel, one of the holy angels ...
said, This is the prison of the angels, and here are they kept for
ever.”


    Rev. xx. 1-3. “And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the
    key of the bottomless pit (abyss) and a great chain in his hand. And
    he laid hold on the devil and ... cast him into the bottomless pit,
    and shut it, and sealed it over him.”


En. lxxix. “In the days of sinners the years shall be shortened, ... and
every thing done on earth shall be subverted and disappear in its
season.... In those days the fruits of the earth shall not flourish in
their season, ... heaven shall stand still. The moon shall change its
laws, and not be seen at its proper period; ... and all the classes of
the stars shall be shut up against sinners.”

En. lxi. 9. “And trouble shall seize them when they shall behold this
Son of woman sitting upon the throne of his glory.”


    Matt. xxiv. 7, 21, 22, 29, 30. “There shall be famines and
    earthquakes in divers places ... great tribulation, such as was not
    since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall
    be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh
    be saved.... Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the
    sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and
    the stars shall fall from heaven.... Then shall the tribes of the
    earth mourn; and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds
    of heaven, with power and great glory.”


En. xlvii. 3. “He sat upon the throne of his glory, while the book of
the living was opened in his presence, and while all the powers which
were above the heavens stood around and before him.”

En. l. “In those days shall the earth deliver up from her womb, and hell
deliver up from hers, that which it has received, and destruction shall
restore that which it owes. He shall select the righteous and holy from
among them.”

En. liv. “In those days shall the mouth of hell be opened into which
they shall be immerged; hell shall destroy and swallow up sinners from
the face of the elect.”


    Rev. xx. 11-13, 15. “I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on
    it, ... and I saw the dead, small and great, standing before the
    throne; and the books were opened, and another book was opened,
    which is the book of life, and the dead were judged out of those
    things what were written in the books, according to their works. And
    the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell
    delivered up the dead which were in them.... And whosoever was not
    found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.”


En. xl. 1. “After this I beheld thousands of thousands, and ten thousand
times ten thousand, and an infinite number of people, standing before
the Lord of spirits.”


    Rev. v. 11. “I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round
    about the throne, ... and the number of them was ten thousand times
    ten thousand, and thousands of thousands.”


En. xlv. 3. “In that day shall the Elect One sit upon a throne of glory,
and shall choose their conditions and countless habitations.”


    Matt. xxv. 31, 32. “Then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory;
    and before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate
    them one from another.”

    John xiv. 2. “In my father’s house are many habitations.”


En. xlv. 4. “In that day I will cause my Elect One to dwell in the midst
of them. I will change the face of the heaven: I will bless it and
illuminate it for ever. I will also change the face of the earth: I will
bless it, and cause those whom I have chosen to dwell upon it.”


    Rev. vii. 15. “He that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among
    them.”

    2 Peter iii. 13. “Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look
    for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.”


En. xcii. 17. “The former heaven shall depart and pass away, a new
heaven shall appear.”


    Rev. xxii. 1. “I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first
    heaven and the first earth were passed away.”


En. lxi. 4-9. “The word of his mouth shall destroy all sinners, and all
the ungodly who shall perish at his presence.... Trouble shall come upon
them, as upon a woman in travail. One portion of them shall look upon
another; they shall be astonished, and shall abase their countenances;
and trouble shall seize them, when they shall behold this Son of woman
sitting upon the throne of His glory.”


    Matt. xxv. 31. “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, then
    shall he sit upon the throne of his glory.”

    2 Thess. i. 9. “Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
    from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.”

    1 Thess. v. 3. “Then sudden destruction cometh upon them as travail
    upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.”

    2 Thess. ii. 8. “That wicked whom the Lord shall consume with the
    Spirit of his mouth.”


En. lxvi. 5-8. “I beheld that valley in which ... arose a strong smell
of sulphur which became mixed with the waters; and the valley of the
angels, who had been guilty of seduction, burned underneath its soil.
Through that valley also rivers of fire were flowing, to which the
angels shall be condemned, who seduced the inhabitants of the earth.”


    Matt. xiii. 42. “And shall cast them into a furnace of fire.”

    Matt. xxv. 41. “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
    prepared for the devil and his angels.”

    Rev. xx. 10. “And the devil that deceived them was cast into the
    lake of fire and brimstone.”


En. civ. “Now will I point out a mystery. Many sinners shall turn and
transgress against the word of uprightness. They shall speak evil
things; they shall utter falsehood.”


    1 Tim. iv. 12. “The Spirit saith expressly, that in later times some
    shall fall away from the faith, ... through the hypocrisy of men
    that speak lies.”


En. xlviii. 1-7. “In that place I beheld a fountain of righteousness
which never failed, encircled by many springs of wisdom. Of these all
the thirsty drank, and were filled with wisdom, having their habitation
with the righteous, the elect, and the holy.”


    John iv. 14. “But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give
    him shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him shall be
    in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.”

    Rev. xxi. 6. “I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain
    of the water of life freely.”


En. xlviii. “He has preserved the lot of the righteous, because they
have hated and rejected this world of iniquity, and have detested all
its works and ways in the name of the Lord of spirits.”


    Gal. i. 4. “Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us
    from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our
    Father.”

    1 John ii. 15. “Love not the world, neither the things that are in
    the world.”


En. ii. xxvi. 2. “Behold, he comes with ten thousands of his saints, to
execute judgment upon them, and destroy the wicked, and reprove all the
carnal for everything which the sinful and ungodly have done and
committed against him ... [who utter with their mouths unbecoming
language against God, and speak harsh things of his glory].”


    Jude 14, 15. “Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of
    these, saying, ‘Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his
    saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all the ungodly
    of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of
    all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.’”

The bracketed words, in the last quotation from the Book of Enoch,
establish its complete identity with the parallel passage in the Epistle
of Jude—an identity of marvellous clearness when we consider that the
original version reaches us through translations and retranslations from
Aramæan, Greek, and Ethiopic, and now assumes the modern form of
Anglo-Saxon. Archbishop Laurence, although convinced that the apostle
cited the Greek version of the extant Ethiopic manuscripts, was not
aware that the last sentence of his quotation is present in the text. We
have discovered it in chapter xxvi. 2 of the Book of Enoch; and in thus
perfecting the parallelism between prophet and apostle, have placed
beyond controversy that, in the eyes of the author of an Epistle
accepted as Divine revelation, the Book of Enoch was the inspired
production of an antediluvian patriarch.

The attention of theologians has been concentrated on the passage in the
Epistle of Jude because the author specifically names the prophet; but
the cumulative coincidence of language and ideas in Enoch and the
authors of New Testament Scripture, as disclosed in the parallel
passages which we have collated, clearly indicates that the work of the
Semitic Milton was the inexhaustible source from which Evangelists and
Apostles, or the men who wrote in their names, borrowed their
conceptions of the resurrection, judgment, immortality, perdition, and
of the universal reign of righteousness under the eternal dominion of
the Son of man. This evangelical plagiarism culminates in the Revelation
of John, which adapts the visions of Enoch to Christianity with
modifications in which we miss the sublime simplicity of the great
master of apocalyptic prediction, who prophesied in the name of the
antediluvian patriarch.

It is important to observe that it was not the practice of early
Christian writers to name the authors whose language and ideas they
borrowed. When we therefore detect the teaching and diction of Enoch in
Gospels and Epistles, our conclusions are analogous to those of the
orthodox theologians who identify passages of Scripture in the pages of
the ante-Nicene Fathers, although frequently cited from unnamed sources,
with an obscurity of expression more dubious in attestation of their
origin, than the remarkable clearness with which the language of Enoch
may be recognized in the New Testament. Biblical analysts may question
obscure traces of evangelical diction in apostolic Fathers; but what
candid and impartial inquirer can doubt the Enochian origin of the “Son
of man sitting upon the throne of his glory”—the “new heaven” and the
“new earth;” the “many habitations” of the elect, and “the everlasting
fire prepared for the devil and his angels”?

We have merely collated some of the most striking instances of parallel
passages in the Book of Enoch and in the New Testament. Our readers can
supplement our labours through their own research, in further
attestation of the controlling influence exercised by the uncanonical
author on the language and ideas of canonical works.

Some orthodox theologians, unwilling to admit that an apostle quoted an
apocryphal book, contend that Jude referred to a traditional utterance
of the ancient patriarch; but this obviously fanciful theory inevitably
vanishes in the presence of the numerous passages from the Book of
Enoch, which enter into the composition of New Testament Scripture.
Other pious apologists affirm the post-Christian authorship of the book,
a theory which involves the most improbable assumption that an author,
familiar with the story of a suffering and crucified Messiah, uttered
fictitious predictions in the name of an ancient prophet, which depicted
the career of the Son of man on earth as the triumphal march of a
victorious king. Again, theologians who shrink from the admission that
the language and ideas of evangelists and apostles were anticipated in
an apocryphal book, suggest that the Messianic passages contain
Christian interpolations. But if modern defenders of the faith thus
accuse primitive saints and martyrs of literary forgery, how can they
accept an infallible New Testament at the hands of men thus guilty of
conspiring for the deception of posterity? Convinced of the honesty of
early Christians, we concur with the opinion of Archbishop Laurence,
confirmed by Hoffman, that the passages in question are so intimately
interwoven with the general context that they cannot be removed without
evidently destroying the texture of the whole.

The astronomical calculations on which Archbishop Laurence based his
theory of the residence of the author of the Book of Enoch have been
questioned; but, once his Hebrew nationality has been admitted, it
matters not whether he wrote in or out of Palestine, with this
exception, that if the work was not brought from a distant country into
Judæa, the facility with which a pseudonymous book was accepted in the
locality of its recent composition as the genuine production of an
antediluvian prophet, necessarily encourages scepticism as to the dates
and authorship of all ancient Hebrew literature. It cannot be said that
internal evidence attests the superiority of the Old Testament to the
Book of Enoch; for no Hebrew prophet is more eloquent than its author in
denouncing iniquity, commending righteousness, and inviting all men to
place implicit trust in the final vindication of Divine justice.

Internal evidence indicates the presence of independent Tracts in the
Book of Enoch, possibly composed by different authors. Thus chapters
lxiv. to lxvii. 1 record a vision of the Deluge, narrated as if by Noah
instead of Enoch, and inserted in the middle of another vision with
which it has no connection. But if Pseudo-Enoch borrowed from earlier
writers, the presence of the language and ideas of every section of his
work in the pages of New Testament Scripture inevitably indicates that
the Book or Books of Enoch existed in their present form before the
Christian era.

Christianity obviously borrows the terrors of eternal fire from the Book
of Enoch. Evangelists and Apostles define the duration of Divine
retribution by æons of æons[12] (αἱ αἰῶνες τῶν αἰώνων), or millions of
millions of years, expressive of eternity. It is true that the word æon
can be used in the sense of finite time, but when the authors of New
Testament Scripture speak of æonian fire (τὸ πῦρ τὸ αἰώνιον) they
obviously mean eternal flames. Modern humanity, shrinking from so
merciless a view of Divine retribution, suggests that when sinners have
been tortured for æons of æons they may look forward hopefully to the
future. It is questionable whether final despair would not be preferable
to this form of “hope deferred;” but if modern believers adopt the
terminable theory of æonian fire, this commutation of sentence becomes
equally applicable to the devil and his angels, whose punishment has
been decreed of same duration as that of human sinners;[13] and thus the
traditional enemies of God and man may hope for joyful restoration to
fellowship with Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, and communion with the
saints, whom they once sought to betray by arts infernal. And as the
righteous are also only promised their rewards in heaven for æons of
æons,[14] if these words mean not eternity, saints may fear, whilst
sinners hope for, the vicissitudes of æonian futurity. Again, as the
dominion of the Messiah,[15] and even the power of God,[16] are depicted
of æonian duration, any limitation of the infinite in the sacred
terminology—æons of æons—imperils the eternal in Divinity.

Theologians who seek to vindicate Divine clemency through the dubious
expedient of substituting æonian for eternal retribution, overlook the
fact that their theory imputes to Divine wisdom the adoption of torture
as the most effectual means of transforming sinners into saints,—a
theory which practically invites us to follow the Divine example by
torturing our criminals into reformation. How much more consistent for
those who cannot reconcile eternal fire with infinite mercy, to take one
step further in the paths of scepticism, by rejecting everlasting
torture as the nightmare of Enochian visions; instead of assuming that
revelation speaks in language so ambiguous that primitive saints
condemned unbaptized babes to eternal fire, whilst modern piety would
even rescue hardened sinners from the flames! If inspired terminology
encouraged spiritual ferocity in the age of St. Augustine, and fosters
theological humanity in the nineteenth century, what may not be the
future interpretation of words, now supposed to convey an infallible
meaning to students of Scripture?

The Book of Enoch teaches the pre-existence of the Son of Man, the Elect
One, the Messiah, who “from the beginning existed in secret,”[17] and
whose “name was invoked in the presence of the Lord of spirits, before
the sun and the signs were created.”[18] The author also refers to the
“other Power who was upon earth over the water on that day,”[19]—an
apparent reference to the language of Gen. i. 2. We have thus the Lord
of spirits, the Elect One, and a third Power, seemingly foreshadowing
the Trinity of futurity; but although Enoch’s ideal Messiah doubtless
exercised an important influence on primitive conceptions of the
Divinity of the Son of man, we fail to identify his obscure reference to
another “Power” with the Trinitarianism of the Alexandrine school; more
especially as “angels of power” abound in the visions of Enoch.

That remarkable passage in the Book of Enoch, which declares that the
heathen “sacrificed to devils as to gods,”[20] is the obvious source of
that superstition through which primitive Christianity saw in Olympian
deities, not the mere phantoms of man’s imagination, but the fallen
angels who, driven forth from heaven, sought compensation in spiritual
dominion on earth,—a superstition still further confirmed by universal
belief in miracles, wrought, not merely by the Supreme, but by
subordinate powers, whether good or evil.

Thus far we learn that the Book of Enoch was published before the
Christian era by some great Unknown of Semitic race, who, believing
himself to be inspired in a post-prophetic age, borrowed the name of an
antediluvian patriarch to authenticate his own enthusiastic forecast of
the Messianic kingdom. And as the contents of his marvellous Book enter
freely into the composition of the New Testament, it follows that if the
author was not an inspired prophet, who predicted the teaching of
Christianity, he was a visionary enthusiast whose illusions were
accepted by Evangelists and Apostles as revelation—alternative
conclusions which involve the Divine or human origin of Christianity.

It may be said that if the author of the Book of Enoch was not the
patriarch in whose name he wrote, was he not obviously an impostor? In
treating of Hebrew divination in “The Evolution of Christianity,” we
refer to the oracles of Urim and the predictions of Prophets. There was,
however, a third form of divination, known as Bath Kol, or the Daughter
of the Voice, through which the Israelites consulted the Deity by
accepting some preconceived sign in attestation of the Divine approval
of contemplated action. This method of artificial (τεχνικὴ) divination
is said to have succeeded the revelation of prophets, but was practised
by the Israelites at a much earlier period of their history. Thus the
servant of Abraham predetermined the sign through which he would
recognize the future wife of Isaac as divinely chosen; and Jonathan, the
son of Saul, preconcerted the verbal omen through which the Israelites
might know that Jehovah had delivered the Philistines into their hands.

The practice of Bath Kol was doubtless familiar to the Semitic author of
the Book of Enoch; let us not therefore condemn him as an impostor,
knowing that through the accidental synchronism of some pre-arranged
sign, he may have personated Enoch in the conscientious conviction that
he was piously fulfilling the will of the Deity.

The recent death of Dr. Pusey recalls the fact, that the learned
translator of the Book of Enoch was his predecessor as Professor of
Hebrew in the University of Oxford. The friends and admirers of the
eminent theologian, who was one of the authors of the Tractarian
movement, propose to found a memorial Library in his name, with “two or
more clergymen, who shall act as librarians, and shall promote _in
whatever way_ the interests of theological study and religious life
within the University”—a programme which seems to inaugurate the reign
of original research within the domains of ecclesiastical theology. But
if, as we are informed by the promoters of the proposed endowment, Dr.
Pusey was above all things “a Christian apologist, the advocate and
champion of the Church of eighteen centuries,” how can the disciples,
who saw in him the “great pillar which once sustained the fortunes of
the Church of England,” encourage a freedom of inquiry, in his name,
which may result in conclusions adverse to the ecclesiastical faith in
which their master lived and died?

Eminent theologians tell us that the future librarians “should be
students of theology—the queen of sciences,—among whom Dr. Pusey held a
position in the first rank;” and yet that he was a zealous supporter of
“a movement which embodied truths included ages ago in the formularies
of the Church.” But how can theology be enrolled among the sciences if
its professors reason in ecclesiastical fetters? As well might a modern
astronomer demand the assent of his pupils to the mediæval theory of the
earth’s immobility, before proceeding to investigate the laws of the
solar system: and thus, doubtless, most theologians seek Divine truth,
weighted with a heritage of foregone conclusions, adverse to the
admission of unorthodox facts.

We all can sympathize with the desire of his disciples to do honour to
the memory of the Tractarian apostle, of many virtues, in whom they see
a “great man, raised up by God Almighty to live and labour for His
Church;” but men who take this transcendental view of a movement, in
which others simply see progress on the road to Rome, can scarcely
consider the prescriptive rights of primitive or mediæval dogmas, in
that impartial mood to which theologians must attain before theology
becomes the “Queen of Sciences.”

Archbishop Laurence was an industrious worker in the scientific
laboratory of theology, when he translated the Bodleian manuscript of
the Book of Enoch, and thus unconsciously placed in our hands the
Ethiopic key to “the evolution of Christianity.” It remains for future
generations to determine whether his labours, or those of his successor
in the Semitic chair of Oxford, shall prove more conducive to the
religious enlightenment of posterity.

Palæontologists who compare the organic fossils of distinctive epochs in
geologic time, and discover in the more recent formations, organisms
partially divergent in structure from pre-existent forms, attribute
variation, not to creative miracles, but to the continuous action of
natural causes fashioning species, throughout the ages, in harmony with
the natural law of “Survival of the Fittest.” We also, having identified
the kindred fossils of Enochian and Evangelical epochs, inevitably infer
that modified versions of pre-existent ideas are traceable, not to
miraculous, but to natural sources,—conclusions which inaugurate the
science of theologic palæontology, and invite all learned travellers to
follow the example of Bruce, by searching the world for ancient
manuscripts which may disclose the merely human origin of dogmas and
mysteries, now accepted as Divine.

Archbishop Laurence, when Professor of Hebrew in the University of
Oxford, translated the Book of Enoch within the walls of the Bodleian
Library, and when appealed to by the Rev. I. M. Butt, in 1827, to
publish the Ethiopic original, answered, “I cannot, the manuscript not
being my own, but belonging to the University of Oxford.” In his preface
to the third edition of his translation, the Archbishop adds, “If the
University of Oxford would oblige the literary world by publishing the
original Ethiopic from the manuscript in its possession, I am persuaded
that Ethiopic scholars would not be wanting to accomplish more than has
been hitherto done for this long regretted book, after its sleep of
ages.” Since these words were written, great progress has been made in
the study of comparative philology; and there are now doubtless many
eminent linguists in England, on the Continent, and in the United
States, who could still further illumine the pages of the Book of Enoch,
through co-operative criticism of the Ethiopic text. Is not the time
therefore come for the University of Oxford to publish the original
manuscript in their possession, that learned Jews and Gentiles may study
the inspired predictions of a great Hebrew prophet, or admire the
sublime imagery of the Semitic Milton who ascended to the heavens to
dramatize Divinity?

At the era of the Renaissance, when enfranchised thought turned from
Aristotle to Plato, it is said that Cardinal Bellarmine advised Pope
Clement VIII. to discountenance a philosophy which approached so closely
to the truths of the gospel—obviously meaning that it would be
inexpedient for the Church to favour a merely human system which
anticipated the Trinitarian theosophy of alleged revelation: is it not
possible that further delay in presenting the world with the Ethiopic
text of Enoch, may suggest to adverse critics, that Oxford neglects the
Hebrew patriarch for the same reason that Rome slighted the Athenian
philosopher?

Archbishop Laurence’s translation, now however, places the Book of Enoch
within the reach of all English readers. Catholics may disregard its
contents, as it is not found in the sacred Canon of their infallible
Church; but Protestants, who adhere to the principles of the
Reformation, and whose tenure of Christianity is therefore contingent on
the appeal to reason, must inevitably enroll Enoch among the prophets,
or reconsider the supernatural in Christianity.

It is important for readers of the Book of Enoch to recollect that we
owe the Reformation to independent study of sacred literature,
previously withdrawn from the people through the oblivion of dead and
untranslated languages. The long neglected Book of Enoch now stands in
analogous relationship with modern seekers after religious truth; and it
remains for its readers to exercise that right of private judgment, to
which Protestantism owes its existence, by impartially considering the
inevitable modifications of faith involved in the discovery, that the
language and ideas of alleged revelation are found in a pre-existent
work, accepted by Evangelists and Apostles as inspired, but classed by
modern theologians among apocryphal productions.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[In revising the proof-sheets of the Book of Enoch, we have been still
further impressed by its relationship with New Testament Scripture.
Thus, the parable of the sheep, rescued by the good Shepherd from
hireling guardians and ferocious wolves, is obviously borrowed by the
fourth Evangelist from Enoch lxxxix., in which the author depicts the
shepherds as killing and destroying the sheep before the advent of their
Lord, and thus discloses the true meaning of that hitherto mysterious
passage in the Johannine parable—“All that ever came before me are
thieves and robbers”—language in which we now detect an obvious
reference to the allegorical shepherds of Enoch.]

Footnote 1:

  Compare Book of Enoch ii.

Footnote 2:

  Heb. xi. 5.

Footnote 3:

  “Against Heresies,” iv. 16. Compare Book of Enoch xv.

Footnote 4:

  “On Female Dress,” ii.

Footnote 5:

  “De Principiis,” viii.

Footnote 6:

  Book of Enoch xl. 8, 9.

Footnote 7:

  “Halleluiah” appears upon the cups; and thus a word, with which
  ancient Syro-Chaldæans conjured, has become, through the vicissitudes
  of language, the Shibboleth of modern “Revivalists.”

Footnote 8:

  “On Female Dress,” bk. i. chap. i.

Footnote 9:

  Chap. xviii.

Footnote 10:

  Chap. xxxviii. 2.

Footnote 11:

  Chap. cii., ciii.

Footnote 12:

  In “The Evolution of Christianity,” page 355, we mention that “the
  Greek word αἰών (æon), signifying an age, a generation, or time
  everlasting,” was the title adopted by Valentinus for Divine
  emanations.

Footnote 13:

  Matt. xxv. 41; Rev. xx. 10.

Footnote 14:

  Rev. xxii. 5.

Footnote 15:

  Rev. xi. 15.

Footnote 16:

  Rev. vii. 12.

Footnote 17:

  Chap. lxi. 10.

Footnote 18:

  Chap. xlviii.

Footnote 19:

  Chap. lx.

Footnote 20:

  Chap. xix. 2.




                           THE BOOK OF ENOCH.
                                CHAP. I.


1. The word of the blessing of Enoch, how he blessed the elect and the
righteous, who were to exist in the time of trouble; rejecting[21] all
the wicked and ungodly. Enoch, a righteous man, who _was_ with God,
answered and spoke, while his eyes were open, and _while_ he saw a holy
vision in the heavens.[22] This the angels showed me.

2. From them I heard all things, and understood what I saw; that which
will not take place in this generation, but in a generation which is to
succeed at a distant period, on account of the elect.

3. Upon their account I spoke and conversed with him, who will go forth
from his habitation, the Holy and Mighty One, the God of the world:

4. Who will hereafter tread upon Mount Sinai; appear with his hosts; and
be manifested in the strength of his power from heaven.

5. All shall be afraid, and the Watchers be terrified.

6. Great fear and trembling shall seize them, even to the ends of the
earth. The lofty mountains shall be troubled, and the exalted hills
depressed, melting like a honeycomb in the flame. The earth shall be
immerged, and all things which are in it perish; while judgment shall
come upon all, even upon all the righteous:

7. But to them shall he give peace: he shall preserve the elect, and
towards them exercise clemency.

8. Then shall all belong to God; be happy and blessed; and the splendour
of the Godhead shall illuminate them.

Footnote 21:

  _to the rejection of._ N.B. The Italic words in the text supply an
  ellipsis. In the notes they are used to mark the literal sense.

Footnote 22:

  _which_ was _in the heavens_.




                               CHAP. II.


Behold, he comes with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment
upon them, and destroy the wicked, and reprove all the carnal[23] for
everything which the sinful and ungodly have done, and committed against
him.[24]

Footnote 23:

  _of flesh._

Footnote 24:

  Quoted by St. Jude ver. 14, 15.




                               CHAP. III.


1. All who are in the heavens know what is transacted[25] _there_.

2. _They know_ that the heavenly luminaries change not their paths; that
each rises and sets regularly, every one at its proper period, without
transgressing the commands _which they have received_. They behold the
earth, and understand what is there transacted, from the beginning to
the end of it.

3. _They see_ that every work of God is invariable in the period of its
appearance. They behold summer and winter: _perceiving_ that the whole
earth is full of water; and that the cloud, the dew, and the rain
refresh it.

Footnote 25:

  _the work._




                               CHAP. IV.


They consider and behold every tree, how it appears to wither, and every
leaf to fall off, except of fourteen trees, which are not deciduous;
which wait from the old, to the appearance of the new _leaf_, for two or
three winters.




                                CHAP. V.


Again they consider the days of summer, that the sun is upon it at its
very beginning; while you seek for a covered and shady spot on account
of the burning sun; while the earth is scorched up with fervid heat, and
you become incapable of walking either upon the ground or upon the rocks
in consequence of that heat.




                               CHAP. VI.


1. They consider how the trees, when they put forth their green leaves,
become covered, and produce fruit; understanding everything, and knowing
that He who lives for ever does all these things for you:

2. _That_ the works at the beginning of every existing year, that all
his works, are subservient to him, and invariable; yet as God has
appointed, so are all things brought to pass.

3. They see, too, how the seas and the rivers together complete their
respective operations:

4. _But_ you endure not patiently, nor fulfil the commandments of the
Lord; but you transgress and calumniate _his_ greatness; and malignant
are the words in your polluted mouths against his Majesty.

5. Ye withered in heart, no peace shall be to you!

6. Therefore your days shall you curse, and the years of your lives
shall perish; perpetual execration shall be multiplied, and you shall
not obtain mercy.

7. In those days shall you resign your peace with the eternal
maledictions of all the righteous, and sinners shall perpetually
execrate you;

8. _Shall execrate_ you with the ungodly.

9. The elect shall possess light, joy, and peace; and they shall inherit
the earth.

10. But you, ye unholy, shall be accursed.

11. Then shall wisdom be given to the elect, all of whom shall live, and
not again transgress by impiety or pride; but shall humble themselves,
possessing prudence, and shall not repeat transgression.

12. They shall not be condemned the whole period of their lives, nor die
in torment and indignation; but the sum of their days[26] shall be
completed, and they shall grow old in peace; while the years of their
happiness shall be multiplied with joy, and with peace, for ever, the
whole duration of their existence.

Footnote 26:

  _the days of their life._




                       CHAP. VII. [SECT. II.[27]]


1. [28]It happened after the sons of men had multiplied in those days,
that daughters were born to them, elegant and beautiful.

2. And when the angels, the sons of heaven, beheld them, they became
enamoured of them, saying to each other, Come, let us select for
ourselves wives from the progeny of men, and let us beget children.

3. Then their leader Samyaza said to them; I fear that you may perhaps
be indisposed to the performance of this enterprise;

4. And that I alone shall suffer for so grievous a crime.

5. But they answered him and said; We all swear;

6. And bind ourselves by mutual execrations, that we will not change our
intention, but execute our projected undertaking.

7. Then they swore all together, and all bound themselves by mutual
execrations. Their whole number was two hundred, who descended upon
Ardis, which is the top of mount Armon.

8. That mountain therefore was called[29] Armon, because they had sworn
upon it, and bound themselves by mutual execrations.

9. These are the names of their chiefs: Samyaza, who was their leader,
Urakabarameel, Akibeel, Tamiel, Ramuel, Danel, Azkeel, Saraknyal, Asael,
Armers, Batraal, Anane, Zavebe, Samsaveel, Ertael, Turel, Yomyael,
Arazyal. These were the prefects of the two hundred angels, and the
remainder were all with them.

10. Then they took wives, each choosing for himself; whom they began to
approach, and with whom they cohabited; teaching them sorcery,
incantations, and the dividing of roots and trees.

11. [30]And the women[31] conceiving brought forth giants,

12. Whose stature was each three hundred cubits. These devoured all
_which_ the labour of men _produced_; until it became impossible to feed
them;

13. When they turned themselves against men, in order to devour them;

14. And began to injure birds, beasts, reptiles, and fishes, to eat
their flesh one after another, and to drink their blood.

15. Then the earth reproved the unrighteous.

Footnote 27:

  _Section_ II. Paris MS. transcribed by Woide.

Footnote 28:

  The first two extracts made by Syncellus from the Greek commence here,
  and end with the 15th verse of chap. x.

Footnote 29:

  _they called._

Footnote 30:

  This and the following verses of this chapter, viz. 11, 12, 13, 14,
  15, seem to belong to the next chapter, and should perhaps be inserted
  between the 8th and 9th verses of that chapter. Such appears to be
  their situation in the Greek fragment, quoted by Syncellus.

Footnote 31:

  _They._




                              CHAP. VIII.


1. Moreover Azazyel taught men to make swords, knives, shields,
breastplates, the fabrication of mirrors,[32] and the workmanship of
bracelets and ornaments, the use of paint, the beautifying of the
eyebrows, _the use of_ stones of every valuable and select kind, and of
all sorts of dyes, so that the world became altered.

2. Impiety increased; fornication multiplied; and they transgressed and
corrupted all their ways.

3. Amazarak taught all the sorcerers, and dividers of roots:

4. Armers _taught_ the solution of sorcery;

5. Barkayal _taught_ the observers of the stars;

6. Akibeel _taught_ signs;

7. Tamiel taught astronomy;

8. And Asaradel taught the motion of the moon.

 9. And men, being destroyed, cried out; and their voice reached to
heaven.

Footnote 32:

  _made them see that which was behind them._




                               CHAP. IX.


1. Then Michael and Gabriel, Raphael, Suryal, and Uriel, looked down
from heaven, and saw the quantity of blood which was shed on earth, and
all the iniquity which was done upon it, and said one to another, _It
is_ the voice of their cries;

2. The earth deprived _of her children_ has cried even to the gate of
heaven.

3. And now to you, O ye holy ones of heaven, the souls of men complain,
saying, Obtain Justice for us with[33] the Most High. Then they said to
their Lord, the King, _Thou art_ Lord of lords, God of gods, King of
kings. The throne of thy glory is for ever and ever, and for ever and
ever is thy name sanctified and glorified. Thou art blessed and
glorified.

4. Thou hast made all things; thou possessest power over all things; and
all things are open and manifest before thee. Thou beholdest all things,
and nothing can be concealed from thee.

5. Thou hast seen what Azazyel has done, how he has taught every species
of iniquity upon earth, and has disclosed to the world all the secret
things which are done in the heavens.

6. Samyaza also has taught sorcery, to whom thou hast given authority
over those who are associated with him. They have gone together to the
daughters of men; have lain with them; have become polluted;

7. And have discovered crimes to them.

8. The women likewise have brought forth giants.

9. Thus has the whole earth been filled with blood and with iniquity.

10. And now behold the souls of those who are dead, cry out.

11. And complain even to the gate of heaven.

12. Their groaning ascends; nor can they escape from the unrighteousness
which is committed on earth. Thou knowest all things, before they exist.

13. Thou knowest these things, and what has been done by them; yet thou
dost not speak to us.

14. What on account of these things ought we to do to them?

Footnote 33:

  _Bring judgment to us from._




                                CHAP. X.


1. Then the Most High, the Great and Holy One spoke,

2. And sent Arsayalalyur to the son of Lamech,

3. Saying, Say to him in my name, Conceal thyself.

4. Then explain to him the consummation which is about to take place;
for all the earth shall perish; the waters of a deluge shall come over
the whole earth, and all things which are in it shall be destroyed.

5. And now teach him how he may escape, and how his seed may remain in
all the earth.

6. Again the Lord said to Raphael, Bind Azazyel hand and foot; cast him
into darkness; and opening the desert which is in Dudael, cast him in
there.

7. Throw upon him hurled and pointed stones, covering him with darkness;

8. There shall he remain for ever; cover his face, that he may not see
the light.

9. And in the great day of judgment let him be cast into the fire.

10. Restore the earth, which the angels have corrupted; and announce
life to it, that I may revive it.

11. All the sons of men shall not perish in consequence of every secret,
by which the Watchers have destroyed, and _which_ they have taught,
their offspring.

12. All the earth has been corrupted by the effects of the teaching[34]
of Azazyel. To him therefore ascribe the whole crime.

13. To Gabriel also the Lord said, Go to the biters, to the reprobates,
to the children of fornication; and destroy the children of fornication,
the offspring of the Watchers, from among men; bring them forth, and
excite[35] them one against another. Let them perish by _mutual_
slaughter; for length of days shall not be theirs.

14. They shall all entreat thee, but their fathers shall not obtain
_their wishes_ respecting them; for they shall hope for eternal life,
and that they may live, each of them, five hundred years.

15. To Michael likewise the Lord said, Go and announce _his crime_ to
Samyaza, and to the others who are with him, who have been associated
with women, that they might be polluted with all their impurity. And
when all their sons shall be slain, when they shall see the perdition of
their beloved, bind them for seventy generations underneath the earth,
even to the day of judgment, and of consummation, until the judgment,
_the effect of_ which will last for ever, be completed.[36]

16. Then shall they be taken away into the lowest depths of the fire in
torments; and in confinement shall they be shut up for ever.

17. Immediately after this shall he, together with them, burn and
perish; they shall be bound until the consummation of many generations.

18. Destroy all the souls addicted to dalliance, and the offspring of
the Watchers, for they have tyrannized over mankind.

19. Let every oppressor perish from the face of the earth;

20. Let every evil work be destroyed;

21. The plant of righteousness and of rectitude appear, and its
produce[37] become a blessing.

22. Righteousness and rectitude shall be for ever planted with delight.

23. And then shall all the saints give thanks, and live until they have
begotten a thousand _children_, while the whole period of their youth,
and their sabbaths shall be completed in peace. In those days all the
earth shall be cultivated in righteousness; it shall be wholly planted
with trees, and filled with benediction; every tree of delight shall be
planted in it.

24. In it shall vines be planted; and the vine which shall be planted in
it shall yield fruit to satiety; every seed, which shall be sown in it,
shall produce for one measure a thousand; and one measure of olives
shall produce ten presses of oil.

25. Purify the earth from all oppression, from all injustice, from all
crime, from all impiety, and from all the pollution which is committed
upon it. Exterminate them from the earth.

26. Then shall all the children of men be righteous, and all nations
shall pay me divine honours, and bless me; and all shall adore me.

27. The earth shall be cleansed from all corruption, from every crime,
from all punishment, and from all suffering; neither will I again send a
deluge upon it from generation to generation for ever.

28. In those days I will open the treasures of blessing which are in
heaven, that I may cause them to descend upon earth, and upon all the
works and labour of man.

29. Peace and equity shall associate with the sons of men all the days
of the world, in every generation of it.

Footnote 34:

  _by the teaching of the work of Azazyel._

Footnote 35:

  _send._

Footnote 36:

  Here end the first two extracts made by Syncellus.

Footnote 37:

  _and the work of righteousness and rectitude._




                           (No CHAP. XI.[38])
                      CHAP. XII. [SECT. III.[39]]


1. Before all these things Enoch was concealed; nor did any one of the
sons of men know where he was concealed, where he had been, and what had
happened.

2. He was wholly engaged with the holy ones, and with the Watchers in
his days.

3. I, Enoch, was blessing the great Lord and King of peace.

4. And behold the Watchers called me Enoch the scribe.

5. Then _the Lord_ said to me: Enoch, scribe of righteousness, go tell
the Watchers of heaven, who have deserted the lofty sky, and their holy
everlasting station, _who_ have been polluted with women.

6. And have done as the sons of men do, by taking to themselves wives,
and _who_ have been greatly corrupted on the earth;

7. That on the earth they shall never obtain peace and remission of sin.
For they shall not rejoice in their offspring; they shall behold the
slaughter of their beloved; shall lament for the destruction of their
sons; and shall petition for ever; but shall not obtain mercy and peace.

Footnote 38:

  The Paris MS. makes the last two verses of the preceding chapter, the
  xi. chapter.

Footnote 39:

  Paris MS.




                              CHAP. XIII.


1. Then Enoch, passing on, said to Azazyel: Thou shalt not obtain peace.
A great sentence is gone forth against thee. He shall bind thee;

2. Neither shall relief, mercy, and supplication be thine, on account of
the oppression which thou hast taught;

3. And on account of every act of blasphemy, tyranny, and sin, which
thou hast discovered to the children of men.

4. Then departing _from him_ I spoke to them all together;

5. And they all became terrified, and trembled;

6. Beseeching me to write for them a memorial of supplication, that they
might obtain forgiveness; and that I might make the memorial of their
prayer ascend up before the God of heaven; because they could not
themselves thenceforwards address him, nor raise up their eyes to heaven
on account of the disgraceful offence for which they were judged.

7. Then I wrote a memorial of their prayer and supplication, for their
spirits, for everything which they had done, and for the subject of
their entreaty, that they might obtain remission and rest.

8. Proceeding on, I continued over the waters of Danbadan, which is on
the right to the west of Armon, reading the memorial of their prayer,
until I fell asleep.

9. And behold a dream came to me, and visions appeared above me. I fell
down and saw a vision of punishment, that I might relate it to the sons
of heaven, and reprove them. When I awoke I went to them. All being
collected together stood weeping in Oubelseyael, which is situated
between Libanos and Seneser, with their faces veiled.

10. I related in their presence all the visions which I had seen, and my
dream;

11. And began to utter these words of righteousness, reproving the
Watchers of heaven.




                               CHAP. XIV.


1. This is the book of the words of righteousness, and of the reproof of
the Watchers, who belong to the world, according to that which He, who
is holy and great, commanded in the vision. I perceived in my dream,
that I was now speaking with a tongue of flesh, and with my breath,
which the Mighty One has put into the mouth of men, that they might
converse with it.

2. And understand with the heart. As he has created and given to men
_the power of_ comprehending the word of understanding, so has he
created and given to me _the power of_ reproving the Watchers, the
offspring of heaven. I have written your petition; and in my vision it
has been shown me, that what you request will not be granted you as long
as the world endures.[40]

3. Judgment has been passed upon you: _your request_ will not be granted
you.

4. From this time forward, never shall you ascend into heaven; He has
said, that on the earth He will bind you, as long as the world endures.

5. But before these things you shall behold the destruction of your
beloved sons; you shall not possess them, but they shall fall before you
by the sword.

6. Neither shall you entreat for them, nor for yourselves;

7. But you shall weep and supplicate in silence. The words of the book
which I wrote.

8. A vision thus appeared to me.

9. Behold, in _that_ vision clouds and a mist invited me;[41] agitated
stars[42] and flashes of lightning impelled and pressed me forwards,
while winds in the vision assisted my flight, accelerating my
progress.[43]

10. They elevated me aloft to heaven. I proceeded, until I arrived at a
wall built with stones of crystal.[44] A vibrating flame[45] surrounded
it, which began to strike me with terror.

11. Into this vibrating flame I entered;

12. And drew nigh to a spacious habitation built also with stones of
crystal. Its walls too, as well as pavement, were _formed_ with stones
of crystal, and crystal likewise was the ground. Its roof had the
appearance of agitated[46] stars and flashes of lightning; and among
them were cherubim of fire in a stormy sky.[47] A flame burned around
its walls; and its portal blazed with fire. When I entered into this
dwelling, it was hot as fire and cold as ice. No _trace_ of delight or
of life was there. Terror overwhelmed me, and a fearful shaking seized
me.

13. Violently agitated and trembling, I fell upon my face. In the vision
I looked,

14. And behold there was another habitation more spacious than _the
former_, every entrance to which was open before me, erected in _the
midst_ of a vibrating flame.

15. So greatly did it excel in all points, in glory, in magnificence,
and in magnitude, that it is impossible to describe to you either the
splendour or the extent of it.

16. Its floor was on fire; above were lightnings and agitated stars,
while its roof exhibited a blazing fire.

17. Attentively I surveyed it, and saw that it contained an exalted
throne;

18. The appearance of which was like that of frost; while its
circumference resembled the orb of the brilliant sun; and _there was_
the voice of the cherubim.

19. From underneath this mighty throne rivers of flaming fire issued.

20. To look upon it was impossible.

21. One great in glory sat upon it:

22. Whose robe was brighter than the sun, and whiter than snow.

23. No angel was capable of penetrating to view the face of Him, the
Glorious and the Effulgent; nor could any mortal behold Him. A fire was
flaming[48] around Him.

24. A fire also of great extent continued to rise up before Him; so that
not one of those who surrounded Him was capable of approaching Him,
among the myriads of myriads who were before Him. To Him holy
consultation was needless.[49] Yet did not the sanctified, who were near
Him, depart far from Him either by night or by day; nor were they
removed from Him. I also was so far advanced, with a veil on my face,
and trembling. Then the Lord with his _own_ mouth called me, saying,
Approach hither, Enoch, at my holy word.

25. And He raised me up, making me draw near even to the entrance. My
eye was directed to the ground.

Footnote 40:

  _in all the days of the world._

Footnote 41:

  _clouds invited me, and a mist invited me._

Footnote 42:

  _the running of the stars._

Footnote 43:

  _hastening me._

Footnote 44:

  _hail, crystal._

Footnote 45:

  _a tongue of fire._

Footnote 46:

  _the course of the._

Footnote 47:

  _and their heaven_ (i.e. _whose heaven_) was _water_.

Footnote 48:

  _A fire of flaming fire._

Footnote 49:

  _And he required not holy counsel._




                               CHAP. XV.


1. Then addressing me, He spoke and said,[50] Hear, neither be afraid, O
righteous Enoch, thou scribe of righteousness:[51] approach hither, and
hear my voice. Go, say to the Watchers of heaven, who have sent thee to
pray for them, You ought to pray for men, and not men for you.

2. Wherefore have you forsaken the lofty and holy heaven, which endures
for ever, and have lain with women; have defiled yourselves with the
daughters of men; have taken to yourselves wives; have acted like the
sons of the earth, and have begotten an impious offspring?[52]

3. You being spiritual, holy, and possessing a life[53] which is
eternal, have polluted yourselves with women; have begotten in carnal
blood; have lusted in the blood of men; and have done as those _who are_
flesh and blood do.

4. These however die and perish.

5. Therefore have I given to them wives, that they might cohabit with
them; that sons might be born of them; and that this might be transacted
upon earth.

6. But you from the beginning were made spiritual, possessing a life
which is eternal, and not subject to death for ever.[54]

7. Therefore I made not wives for you, because, being spiritual, your
dwelling is in heaven.

8. [55]Now the giants, who have been born of spirit and of flesh, shall
be called upon earth evil spirits, and on earth shall be their
habitation. Evil spirits shall proceed from their flesh, because they
were created from above; from the holy Watchers was their beginning and
primary foundation. Evil spirits shall they be upon earth, and the
spirits of the wicked shall they be called. The habitation of the
spirits of heaven shall be in heaven; but upon earth shall be the
habitation of terrestrial spirits, who are born on earth.

9. The spirits of the giants _shall be like_ clouds, which shall
oppress, corrupt, fall, contend, and bruise upon earth.

10. They shall cause lamentation. No food shall they eat; and they shall
be thirsty; they shall be concealed, and shall not[56] rise up against
the sons of men, and against women; for they come forth during the days
of slaughter and destruction.

Footnote 50:

  _he said with his voice._

Footnote 51:

  _O Enoch, O righteous man, and scribe of righteousness._

Footnote 52:

  _giants._

Footnote 53:

  _living a life._

Footnote 54:

  _in all the generations of the world._

Footnote 55:

  The third extract made by Syncellus begins here, and ends with the
  first verse of the next chapter.

Footnote 56:

  _and those spirits shall not._ M. De Sacy here remarks, that the sense
  seems to require an affirmative, instead of a negative, clause.




                               CHAP. XVI.


1. And as to the death of the giants, wheresoever their spirits depart
from their bodies, let their flesh, that which is perishable, be without
judgment. Thus shall they perish, until the day of the great
consummation of the great world. A destruction shall take place of[57]
the Watchers and the impious.

2. And now to the Watchers, who have sent thee to pray for them, who in
the beginning were in heaven,

3. _Say_, In heaven have you been; secret things, however, have not been
manifested to you; yet have you known a reprobated mystery.

4. And this you have related to women in the hardness of your heart, and
by that mystery have women and mankind multiplied evils upon the earth.

5. Say to them, Never therefore shall you obtain peace.

Footnote 57:

  _It shall be consummated respecting._




                      CHAP. XVII. [SECT. IV.[58]]


1. They raised me up into a certain place,[59] where there was the
appearance of a burning fire; and when they pleased they assumed the
likeness of men.

2. They carried me to a lofty spot, to a mountain, the top of which
reached to heaven.

3. And I beheld the receptacles of light and of thunder at the
extremities of the place, where it was deepest. There was a bow of fire,
and arrows in their quiver, a sword of fire, and every species of
lightning.

4. Then they elevated me to a babbling stream,[60] and to a fire in the
west, which received all the setting of the sun. I came to a river of
fire, which flowed like water, and emptied itself into the great sea
westwards.

5. I saw every large river, until I arrived at the great darkness. I
went to where all of flesh migrate; and I beheld the mountains of the
gloom which constitutes winter, and the place from which issues the
water in every abyss.

6. I saw also the mouths of all the rivers in the world, and the mouths
of the deep.

Footnote 58:

  Paris MS., in which however the title of chap. xvii. is omitted,
  although the section is noticed.

Footnote 59:

  _one place._

Footnote 60:

  _to water of life, which spoke._




                              CHAP. XVIII.


1. I then surveyed the receptacles of all the winds, perceiving that
they contributed to adorn[61] the whole creation, and _to preserve_ the
foundation of the earth.

2. I surveyed the stone _which supports_ the corners of the earth.

3. I also beheld the four winds, which bear up the earth, and the
firmament of heaven.

4. And I beheld the winds occupying the exalted sky.[62]

5. Arising in the midst of heaven and of earth, and constituting the
pillars of heaven.

6. I saw the winds which turn the sky, which cause the orb of the sun
and of all the stars to set; and over the earth I saw the winds which
support the clouds.

7. I saw the path of the angels.

8. I perceived at the extremity of the earth the firmament of heaven
above it. Then I passed on towards the south;

9. Where burnt, both by day and night, six mountains formed of glorious
stones; three towards the east, and three towards the south.

10. Those which were towards the east were of a variegated stone; one of
which was of margarite, and another of antimony. Those towards the south
were of a red stone. The middle one reached to heaven like the throne of
God; _a throne composed_ of alabaster, the top of which was of sapphire.
I saw, too, a blazing fire hanging over[63] all the mountains.

11. And there I saw a place on the other side of an extended territory,
where waters were collected.

12. I likewise beheld terrestrial fountains, deep in the fiery columns
of heaven.

13. And in the columns of heaven I beheld fires, which descended without
number, but neither on high, nor into the deep. Over these fountains
also I perceived a place which had neither the firmament of heaven above
it, nor the solid ground underneath it; neither was there water above
it, nor anything on wing; but the spot was desolate.

14. And there I beheld seven stars, like great blazing mountains, and
like spirits entreating me.

15. Then the angel said, This place, until the consummation of heaven
and earth, will be the prison of the stars, and the host of heaven.

16. The stars which roll over fire are those which transgressed the
commandment of God before their time arrived; for they came not in their
proper season. Therefore was He offended with them, and bound them,
until the period of the consummation of their crimes in the secret year.

Footnote 61:

  _that in them were the ornaments of._

Footnote 62:

  _the height of heaven._

Footnote 63:

  _which was over._




                               CHAP. XIX.


1. Then Uriel said, Here the angels, who cohabited with women, appointed
their leaders;

2. And being numerous in appearance made men profane, and caused them to
err; so that they sacrificed to devils as to gods. For in the great day
_there shall be_ a judgment, with which they shall be judged, until they
are consumed; and their wives also shall be _judged_, who led astray the
angels of heaven that they might salute them.

3. And I, Enoch, I alone saw the likeness of the end of all things. Nor
did any human being see it, as I saw it.




                               CHAP. XX.


1. These are the names of the angels who watch.

2. Uriel, one of the holy angels, who _presides_ over[64] clamour and
terror.

3. Raphael, one of the holy angels, who _presides_ over the spirits of
men.

4. Raguel, one of the holy angels, who inflicts punishment on the world
and the luminaries.

5. Michael, one of the holy angels, who, _presiding_ over human virtue,
commands the nations.

6. Sarakiel, one of the holy angels, who _presides_ over the spirits of
the children of men that transgress.

7. Gabriel, one of the holy angels, who _presides_ over Ikisat,[65] over
paradise, and over the cherubim.

Footnote 64:

  _for_ he it is _who_ is over.

Footnote 65:

  _Ikisat._ This appears to be a proper name.




                               CHAP. XXI.


1. Then I made a circuit to a place in which nothing was completed.

2. And there I beheld neither the tremendous workmanship of an exalted
heaven, nor of an established earth, but a desolate spot, prepared, and
terrific.

3. There, too, I beheld seven stars of heaven bound in it together, like
great mountains, and like a blazing fire. I exclaimed, For what species
of crime have they been bound, and why have they been removed to this
place? Then Uriel, one of the holy angels who was with me, and who
conducted me, answered: Enoch, wherefore dost thou ask; wherefore reason
with thyself, and anxiously inquire? These are those of the stars which
have transgressed the commandment of the most high God; and are here
bound, until the infinite number of the days of their crimes be
completed.

4. From thence I afterwards passed on to another terrific place;

5. Where I beheld the operation of a great fire blazing and glittering,
in the midst of which there was a division. Columns of fire struggled
together to the end of the abyss, and deep was their descent. But
neither its measurement nor magnitude was I able to discover; neither
could I perceive its origin. Then I exclaimed, How terrible is this
place, and how difficult to explore!

6. Uriel, one of the holy angels who was with me, answered and said:
Enoch, why art thou alarmed and amazed at this terrific place, at the
sight of this _place of_ suffering? This, he said, is the prison of the
angels; and here they are kept for ever.




                       CHAP. XXII. [SECT. V.[66]]


1. From thence I proceeded to another spot, where I saw on the west a
great and lofty mountain, a strong rock, and four delightful places.

2. Internally it was deep, capacious, and very smooth; as smooth as if
it had been rolled over: it was both deep and dark to behold.

3. Then Raphael, one of the holy angels who were with me, answered and
said, These are the delightful places where the spirits, the souls of
the dead, will be collected; for them were they formed; and here will be
collected all the souls of the sons of men.

4. These places, in which they dwell, shall they occupy until the day of
judgment, and until their appointed period.

5. Their appointed period will be long, even until the great judgment.
And I saw the spirits of the sons of men who were dead; and their voices
reached to heaven, while they were accusing.[67]

6. Then I inquired of Raphael, an angel who was with me, and said, Whose
spirit is that, the voice of which reaches _to heaven_, and accuses?

7. He answered, saying, This is the spirit of Abel, who was slain by
Cain his brother; and who will accuse that brother,[68] until his seed
be destroyed from the face of the earth;

8. Until his seed perish from the seed of the human race.

9. At that time therefore I inquired respecting him, and respecting the
general judgment, saying, Why is one separated from another? He
answered, Three _separations_ have been made between the spirits of the
dead, and thus have the spirits of the righteous been separated.

10. Namely, _by_ a chasm, _by_ water, and _by_ light above it.

11. And in the same way likewise are sinners separated when they die,
and are buried in the earth; judgment not overtaking them in their
lifetime.

12. Here their souls are separated. Moreover, abundant is their
suffering until the time of the great judgment, the castigation, and the
torment of those who eternally execrate, whose souls are punished and
bound there for ever.

13. And thus has it been from the beginning of the world. Thus has there
existed a separation between the souls of those who utter complaints,
and of those who watch for their destruction, to slaughter them in the
day of sinners.

14. A receptacle of this sort has been formed[69] for the souls of
unrighteous men, and of sinners; of those who have completed crime, and
associated with the impious, whom they resemble. Their souls shall not
be annihilated in the day of judgment, neither shall they arise from
this place. Then I blessed God,

15. And said, Blessed be my Lord, the Lord of glory and of
righteousness, who reigns over all for ever and for ever.

Footnote 66:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 67:

  _blaming or reproving._

Footnote 68:

  _and he will accuse him._

Footnote 69:

  _Thus has it been made._




                              CHAP. XXIII.


1. From thence I went to another place, towards the west, unto the
extremities of the earth,

2. Where I beheld a fire blazing and running along without cessation,
which intermitted its course neither by day nor by night; but continued
always the same.

3. I inquired, saying, What is this, which never ceases?

4. Then Raguel, one of the holy angels who were with me, answered,

5. And said, This blazing fire, which thou beholdest running towards the
west, is _that of_ all the luminaries of heaven.




                              CHAP. XXIV.


1. I went from thence to another place, and saw a mountain of fire
flashing both by day and night. I proceeded towards it; and perceived
seven splendid mountains, which were all different from each other.

2. Their stones were brilliant and beautiful; all were brilliant and
splendid to behold; and beautiful was their surface. Three _mountains_
were towards the east, and strengthened by being placed one upon
another; and three were towards the south, strengthened in a similar
manner. There were likewise deep valleys, which did not approach each
other. And the seventh mountain was in the midst of them. In length they
all resembled the seat of a throne, and odoriferous trees surrounded
them.

3. Among these there was a tree of an unceasing smell; nor of those
which were in Eden was there one of all the fragrant trees which smelt
like this. Its leaf, its flower, and its bark never withered, and its
fruit was beautiful.

4. Its fruit resembled the cluster of the palm. I exclaimed, Behold!
this tree is goodly in aspect, pleasing in its leaf, and the sight of
its fruit is delightful to the eye. Then Michael, one of the holy and
glorious angels who were with me, and _one_ who presided over them,
answered,

5. And said: Enoch, why dost thou inquire respecting the odour of this
tree?

6. _Why_ art thou inquisitive to know it?

7. Then I, Enoch, replied to him, and said, Concerning everything I am
desirous of instruction, but particularly concerning this tree.

8. He answered me, saying, That mountain which thou beholdest, the
extent of whose head resembles the seat of the Lord, will be the seat on
which shall sit the holy and great Lord of glory, the everlasting King,
when he shall come and descend to visit the earth with goodness.

9. And that tree of an agreeable smell, not one of carnal _odour_,[70]
there shall be no power to touch, until the period of the great
judgment. When all shall be punished and consumed for ever, this shall
be bestowed on the righteous and humble. The fruit of this _tree_ shall
be given to the elect. For towards the north life shall be planted in
the holy place, towards the habitation of the everlasting King.

10. Then shall they greatly rejoice and exult in the Holy One. The sweet
odour shall enter into their bones; and they shall live a long life on
the earth, as thy forefathers have lived; neither in their days shall
sorrow, distress, trouble, and punishment afflict them.

11. And I blessed the Lord of glory, the everlasting King, because He
has prepared _this tree_ for the saints, formed it, and declared that He
would give it to them.

Footnote 70:

  _of flesh._




                               CHAP. XXV.


1. From thence I proceeded to the middle of the earth, and beheld a
happy and fertile spot, which contained branches continually sprouting
from the trees which were planted in it. There I saw a holy mountain,
and underneath it water on the eastern side, which flowed towards the
south. I saw also on the east another mountain as high as that; and
between them there were deep, but not wide valleys.

2. Water ran towards the mountain to the west of this; and underneath
there was likewise another mountain.

3. There was a valley, but not a wide one, below it; and in the midst of
them were other deep and dry valleys towards the extremity of the three.
All these valleys, which were deep, but not wide, consisted of a strong
rock, with a tree which was planted in them. And I wondered at the rock
and at the valleys, being extremely surprised.




                              CHAP. XXVI.


1. Then I said, What means this blessed land, all these lofty trees, and
the accursed valley between them?

2. Then Uriel, one of the holy angels who were with me, replied, This
valley is the accursed of the accursed for ever. Here shall be collected
all who utter with their mouths unbecoming language against God, and
speak harsh things of His glory. Here shall they be collected. Here
shall be their territory.

3. In the latter days an example of judgment shall be made of them in
righteousness before the saints: while those who have received mercy
shall for ever, all their days, bless God, the everlasting King.

4. And at the period of judgment shall they bless Him for his mercy, as
He has distributed it to them. Then I blessed God, addressing myself to
Him, and making mention, as was meet, of His greatness.




                              CHAP. XXVII.


1. From thence I proceeded towards the east, to the middle of the
mountain in the desert, the level surface only of which I perceived.

2. It was full of trees of the seed alluded to; and water leaped down
upon it.

3. There appeared a cataract composed as of many cataracts both towards
the west and towards the east. Upon one side were trees; upon the other
water and dew.




                             CHAP. XXVIII.


1. Then I went to another place from the desert, towards the east of
that mountain _which_ I had approached.

2. There I beheld choice trees, particularly _those which produce_ the
sweet-smelling drugs, frankincense and myrrh;[71] and trees unlike to
each other.

3. And over it, above them, was the elevation of the eastern mountain at
no great distance.

Footnote 71:

  _trees of judgment, particularly furniture of the sweet smell of
  frankincense and myrrh._




                              CHAP. XXIX.


1. I likewise saw another place with valleys of water which never
wasted,

2. _Where_ I perceived a goodly tree, which in smell resembled
Zasakinon.

3. And towards the sides of these valleys I perceived cinnamon of a
sweet odour. Over them I advanced towards the east.




                               CHAP. XXX.


1. Then I beheld another mountain containing trees, from which water
flowed like Neketro. Its name was Sarira, and Kalboneba. And upon this
mountain I beheld another mountain, upon which were trees of Alva.

2. These trees were full, like almond trees, and strong; and when they
produced fruit, it was superior to all perfume.




                              CHAP. XXXI.


1. After these things, surveying the entrances of the north, above the
mountains, I perceived seven mountains replete with pure nard,
odoriferous trees, cinnamon and papyrus.

2. From thence I passed on above the summits of those mountains to some
distance eastwards, and went over the Erythræan sea. And when I was
advanced far beyond it, I passed along above the angel Zateel, and
arrived at the garden of righteousness. In this garden I beheld, among
other trees, some which were numerous and large, and which flourished
there.

3. Their fragrance was agreeable and powerful,[72] and their appearance
both varied and elegant. The tree of knowledge also was there, of which
if any one eats, he becomes endowed with great wisdom.

4. It was like a species of the tamarind tree, bearing fruit which
resembled grapes extremely fine; and its fragrance extended to a
considerable distance. I exclaimed, How beautiful is this tree, and how
delightful is its appearance!

5. Then holy Raphael, an angel who was with me, answered and said, This
is the tree of knowledge, of which thy ancient father and thy aged
mother ate, who were before thee; and who, obtaining knowledge, their
eyes being opened, and knowing themselves to be naked, were expelled
from the garden.

Footnote 72:

  _good and great._




                              CHAP. XXXII.


1. From thence I went on towards the extremities of the earth; where I
saw large beasts different from each other, and birds various in their
countenances and forms, as well as with notes of different sounds.

2. To the east of these beasts I perceived the extremities of the earth,
where heaven ceased. The gates of heaven stood open, and I beheld the
celestial stars come forth. I numbered them as they proceeded out of the
gate, and wrote them all down, as they came out one by one according to
their number. _I wrote down_ their names altogether, their times and
their seasons, as the angel Uriel, who was with me, pointed them out to
me.

3. He showed them all to me, and wrote down _an account of_ them.

4. He also wrote down for me their names, their regulations, and their
operations.




                             CHAP. XXXIII.


1. From thence I advanced on towards the north, to the extremities of
the earth.

2. And there I saw a great and glorious wonder at the extremities of the
whole earth.

3. I saw there heavenly gates opening into heaven; three of them
distinctly separated. The northern winds proceeded from them, blowing
cold, hail, frost, snow, dew, and rain.

4. From one of the gates they blew mildly; but when they blew from the
two _other gates_, it was with violence and force. They blew over the
earth strongly.




                              CHAP. XXXIV.


1. From thence I went to the extremities of the world westwards;

2. Where I perceived three gates open, as I had seen in the north; the
gates and passages through them being of equal magnitude.




                              CHAP. XXXV.


1. Then I proceeded to the extremities of the earth southwards; where I
saw three gates open to the south, from which issued dew, rain, and
wind.

2. From thence I went to the extremities of heaven eastwards; where I
saw three heavenly gates open to the east, which had smaller gates
within them. Through each of these small gates the stars of heaven
passed on, and proceeded towards the west by a path which was seen by
them, and that at every period _of their appearance_.

8. When I beheld _them_, I blessed; every time _in which they appeared_,
I blessed the Lord of glory, who had made those great and splendid
signs, that they might display the magnificence of his works to angels
and to the souls of men; and that these might glorify all his works and
operations; might see the effect of his power; might glorify the great
labour of his hands; and bless him for ever.




                   CHAP. XXXVII.[73] [SECT. VI.[74]]


1. The vision which he saw, the second vision of wisdom, which Enoch
saw, the son of Jared, the son of Malaleel, the son of Canan, the son of
Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam. This is the commencement of the
word of wisdom, which I received to declare and tell to those who dwell
upon earth. Hear from the beginning, and understand to the end, the holy
things which I utter in the presence of the Lord of spirits. Those who
were before _us_ thought it good to speak;

2. And let not us, who come after, obstruct the beginning of wisdom.
Until the present period never has there been given before the Lord of
spirits that which I have received, wisdom according to the capacity of
my intellect,[75] and according to the pleasure of the Lord of spirits;
that which I have received from him,[76] a portion of life eternal.

3. And I obtained three parables, which I declared to the inhabitants of
the world.

Footnote 73:

  Chap. xxxvi. does not occur in the MS.

Footnote 74:

  Paris MS. and Bodleian MS.

Footnote 75:

  _according as I have thought._

Footnote 76:

  _which has been given to me by him._




                             CHAP. XXXVIII.


1. Parable the first. When the congregation of the righteous shall be
manifested; and sinners be judged for their crimes, and be troubled in
the sight of the world;

2. When righteousness shall be manifested in the presence of the
righteous themselves, who will be elected for their _good_ works _duly_
weighed by the Lord of spirits; and when the light of the righteous and
the elect, who dwell on earth, shall be manifested; where will the
habitation of sinners be? and where the place of rest for those who have
rejected the Lord of spirits? It would have been better for them, had
they never been born.

3. When, too, the secrets of the righteous shall be revealed, then shall
sinners be judged; and impious men shall be afflicted in the presence of
the righteous and the elect.

4. From that period those who possess the earth shall cease to be[77]
powerful and exalted. Neither shall they be capable of beholding the
countenances of the holy; for the light of the countenances of the holy,
the righteous, and the elect, has been seen by the Lord of spirits.

5. Yet shall not the mighty kings of that period be destroyed; but be
delivered into the hands of the righteous and the holy.

6. Nor thenceforwards shall any obtain commiseration from the Lord of
spirits, because their lives _in this world_ will have been completed.

Footnote 77:

  _shall not be._




                              CHAP. XXXIX.


1. In those days shall the elect and holy race descend from the upper
heavens, and their seed shall then be with the sons of men. Enoch
received books of indignation and wrath, and books of hurry and
agitation.

2. Never shall they obtain mercy, saith the Lord of spirits.

3. A cloud then snatched me up, and the wind raised me above the surface
of the earth, placing me at the extremity of the heavens.

4. There I saw another vision; I _saw_ the habitations and couches of
the saints. There my eyes beheld their habitations with the angels, and
their couches with the holy ones. They were entreating, supplicating,
and praying for the sons of men; while righteousness like water flowed
before them, and mercy like dew _was scattered_ over the earth. And thus
_shall it be_ with them for ever and for ever.

5. At that time my eyes beheld the dwelling[78] of the elect, of truth,
faith, and righteousness.

6. Countless shall be the number of the holy and the elect, in the
presence of God[79] for ever and for ever.

7. Their residence I beheld under the wings of the Lord of spirits. All
the holy and the elect sung before him, in appearance like a blaze of
fire; their mouths being full of blessings, and their lips glorifying
the name of the Lord of spirits. And righteousness incessantly _dwelt_
before him.

8. There was I desirous of remaining, and my soul longed for that
habitation. There was my antecedent inheritance; for thus had I
prevailed[80] before the Lord of spirits.

9. At that time I glorified and extolled the name of the Lord of spirits
with blessing and with praise; for he has established it with blessing
and with praise, according to his own good pleasure.[81]

10. That place long did my eyes contemplate. I blessed and said, Blessed
be he, blessed from the beginning for ever. In the beginning, before the
world was created, and without end is his knowledge.[82]

11. What is this world? Of every existing generation those shall bless
thee who do not sleep _in the dust_, but stand before thy glory,
blessing, glorifying, exalting thee, and saying, The holy, holy, Lord of
spirits, fills the whole world of spirits.

12. There my eyes beheld all who, without sleeping, stand before him and
bless him, saying, Blessed be thou, and blessed be the name of God for
ever and for ever. Then my countenance became changed, until I was
incapable of seeing.

Footnote 78:

  _place._

Footnote 79:

  _in his presence._

Footnote 80:

  _There was my portion before; for thus had it been prevailed
  respecting me._

Footnote 81:

  _according to the will of the Lord of spirits._

Footnote 82:

  _without end he knows._




                               CHAP. XL.


1. After this I beheld thousands of thousands, and myriads of myriads,
and an infinite number of people, standing before the Lord of spirits.

2. On the four wings likewise of the Lord of spirits, on the four sides,
I perceived others, besides those who were standing _before him_. Their
names, too, I know; because the angel, who proceeded with me, declared
them to me, discovering to me every secret thing.

3. Then I heard the voices of those upon the four sides magnifying the
Lord of glory.

4. The first voice blessed the Lord of spirits for ever and for ever.

5. The second voice I heard blessing the elect One, and the elect who
suffer[83] on account of the Lords of spirits.

6. The third voice I heard petitioning and praying for those who dwell
upon earth, and supplicate the name of the Lord of spirits.

7. The fourth voice I heard expelling the impious angels,[84] and
prohibiting them from entering into presence of the Lord of spirits, to
prefer accusations against the inhabitants of the earth.

8. After this I besought the angel of peace, who proceeded with me, to
explain all that was concealed. I said to him, Who are those _whom_ I
have seen on the four sides, and whose words I have heard and written
down? He replied, The first is the merciful, the patient, the holy
Michael.

9. The second is he who _presides_ over every suffering and every
affliction[85] of the sons of men, the holy Raphael. The third, who
_presides_ over all that is powerful, is Gabriel. And the fourth, who
_presides_ over repentance, and the hope of those who will inherit
eternal life, is Phanuel. These are the four angels of the most high
God, and their four voices, which at that time I heard.

Footnote 83:

  _are crucified or tormented._

Footnote 84:

  _the Satans._

Footnote 85:

  _wound._




                               CHAP. XLI.


1. After this I beheld the secrets of the heavens and of paradise,[86]
according to its divisions; and of human action,[87] as they weigh it
there in balances. I saw the habitations of the elect, and the
habitations of the holy. And there my eyes beheld all the sinners, who
denied the Lord of glory, and whom they were expelling from thence, and
dragging away, as they stood _there_; no punishment proceeding against
them from the Lord of spirits.

2. There, too, my eyes beheld the secrets of the lightning and the
thunder; and the secrets of the winds, how they are distributed as they
blow over the earth: the secrets of the winds, of the dew, and of the
clouds. There I perceived the place from which they issued forth, and
became saturated with the dust of the earth.

3. There I saw the wooden[88] receptacles out of which the winds became
separated, the receptacle of hail, the receptacle of snow, the
receptacle of the clouds, and the cloud itself, _which_ continued over
the earth before _the creation of_ the world.

4. I beheld also the receptacles of the moon, whence the moons[89] came,
whither they proceeded, their glorious return, and how one became more
splendid than another. I _marked_ their rich progress, their
unchangeable progress, their disunited and undiminished progress; their
observance of a mutual fidelity by a stable oath;[90] their proceeding
forth before the sun, and their adherence to the path _allotted_
them,[91] in obedience to the command of the Lord of spirits. Potent is
his name for ever and for ever.

5. After this _I perceived, that_ the path both concealed and manifest
of the moon, as well as the progress of its path, was there completed by
day and by night; while each, one with another, looked towards the Lord
of spirits, magnifying and praising without cessation, since praise to
them is rest; for in the splendid sun there is a frequent conversion to
blessing and to malediction.

6. The course of the moon’s path to the righteous is light, but to
sinners it is darkness; in the name of the Lord of spirits, who created
_a division_ between light and darkness, and, separating the spirits of
men, strengthened the spirits of the righteous in the name of his own
righteousness.

7. Nor does the angel prevent _this_, neither is he endowed with the
power of preventing it; for the Judge beholds them all, and judges them
all in his own presence.

Footnote 86:

  _the kingdom or paradise._

Footnote 87:

  _the work or labour of man._

Footnote 88:

  _of woods._

Footnote 89:

  _they._

Footnote 90:

  _by an oath to which they adhered._

Footnote 91:

  _to their path._




                              CHAP. XLII.


1. Wisdom found not a place _on earth_ where she could inhabit; her
dwelling therefore is in heaven.

2. Wisdom went forth to dwell among the sons of men, but she obtained
not an habitation. Wisdom returned to her place, and seated herself in
the midst of the angels. But iniquity went forth after her return, who
unwillingly found _an habitation_, and resided among them, as rain in
the desert, and as a dew in a thirsty land.




                              CHAP. XLIII.


1. I beheld another splendour, and the stars of heaven. I observed that
he called them all by their respective names, and that they heard. In a
righteous balance I saw that he weighed out with their light the
amplitude of their places, and the day of their appearance,[92] and
their conversion. Splendour produced splendour; and their conversion
_was_ into the number of the angels, and of the faithful.

2. Then I inquired of the angel, who proceeded with me, and explained to
me secret things, What _their names_ were. He answered, A similitude of
those has the Lord of spirits shown thee. They are names of the
righteous who dwell upon earth, and who believe in the name of the Lord
of spirits for ever and for ever.

Footnote 92:

  _of their existing._




                              CHAP. XLIV.


Another thing also I saw respecting splendour; that it rises out of the
stars, and becomes splendour; being incapable of forsaking them.




                      CHAP. XLV. [SECT. VII.[93]]


1. Parable the second, respecting these who deny[94] the name of the
habitation of the holy ones, and of the Lord of spirits.

2. Heaven they shall not ascend, nor shall they come on the earth. This
shall be the portion of sinners, who deny the name of the Lord of
spirits, and who are thus reserved for the day of punishment and of
affliction.

3. In that day shall the Elect One sit upon a throne of glory; and shall
choose their conditions and countless habitations (while their spirits
within them shall be strengthened, when they behold my Elect One),
_shall choose them_ for those who have fled for protection to my holy
and glorious name.

4. In that day I will cause my Elect One to dwell in the midst of them;
will change _the face of_ heaven; will bless it, and illuminate it for
ever.

5. I will also change _the face of_ the earth; will bless it; and cause
those whom I have elected to dwell upon it. But those who have committed
sin and iniquity shall not inhabit it,[95] for I have marked their
proceedings.[96] My righteous ones will I satisfy with peace, placing
them before me; but the condemnation of sinners shall draw near, that I
may destroy them from the face of the earth.

Footnote 93:

  In the Paris MS. it is section viii. In the Bodleian MS. section vii.

Footnote 94:

  In the Bodleian MS. there seems here an evident omission. This
  omission is supplied in the Paris MS. I have followed the latter.

Footnote 95:

  _tread upon it._

Footnote 96:

  _for I have seen them._




                              CHAP. XLVI.


1. There I beheld the Ancient of days,[97] whose head was like white
wool, and with him another, whose countenance resembled that of man. His
countenance was full of grace, like _that of_ one of the holy angels.
Then I inquired of one of the angels,[98] who went with me, and who
showed me every secret thing, concerning this Son of man; who he was;
whence he was; and why he accompanied the Ancient of days.

2. He answered and said to me, This is the Son of man, to whom
righteousness belongs; with whom righteousness has dwelt; and who will
reveal all the treasures of that which is concealed: for the Lord of
spirits has chosen him; and his portion has surpassed[99] all before the
Lord of spirits in everlasting uprightness.

3. This Son of man, whom thou beholdest, shall raise up kings and the
mighty from their couches, and the powerful from their thrones; shall
loosen the bridles of the powerful, and break in pieces the teeth of
sinners.

4. He shall hurl kings from their thrones and their dominions; because
they will not exalt and praise him, nor humble themselves _before him_,
by whom[100] their kingdoms were granted to them. The countenance
likewise of the mighty shall He cast down, filling them with confusion.
Darkness shall be their habitation, and worms shall be their bed; nor
from _that_ their bed shall they hope to be again raised, because they
exalted not the name of the Lord of spirits.

5. They shall condemn the stars of heaven, shall lift up their hands
against the Most High, shall tread upon and inhabit the earth,
exhibiting all their works of iniquity, even their works of iniquity.
Their strength shall be in their riches, and their faith in the gods
whom they have formed with their own hands. They shall deny the name of
the Lord of spirits, and shall expel him from the temples, in which they
assemble;

6. And _with him_ the faithful, who suffer in the name of the Lord of
spirits.

Footnote 97:

  _The Chief_ or _Head of days_, Dan. vii. 9.

Footnote 98:

  The words, _Then I inquired of one of the angels_, are omitted in the
  Bodleian MS. They occur in the Paris MS.

Footnote 99:

  _conquered._

Footnote 100:

  _from whence._




                              CHAP. XLVII.


1. In that day the prayer of the holy and the righteous, and the blood
of the righteous, shall ascend from the earth into the presence of the
Lord of spirits.

2. In that day shall the holy ones assemble, who dwell above the
heavens, and with united voice petition, supplicate, praise, laud, and
bless the name of the Lord of spirits, on account of the blood of the
righteous which has been shed; that the prayer of the righteous may not
be intermitted before the Lord of spirits; that for them he would
execute judgment; and that his patience may not endure for ever.

3. At that time I beheld the Ancient of days, while he sat upon the
throne of his glory, _while_ the book of the living was opened in his
presence, and _while_ all the powers which were above the heavens stood
around and before him.

4. Then were the hearts of the saints full of joy, because the
consummation[101] of righteousness was arrived, the supplication of the
saints heard, and the blood of the righteous appreciated by the Lord of
spirits.

Footnote 101:

  _the number._




                             CHAP. XLVIII.


1. In that place I beheld a fountain of righteousness, which never
failed, encircled by many springs of wisdom. Of these all the thirsty
drank, and were filled with wisdom, having their habitation with the
righteous, the elect, and the holy.

2. In that hour was this Son of man invoked before the Lord of spirits,
and his name in the presence of the Ancient of days.

3. Before the sun and the signs were created, before the stars of heaven
were formed, his name was invoked in the presence of the Lord of
spirits. A support shall he be for the righteous and the holy to lean
upon, without falling; and he shall be the light of nations.

4. He shall be the hope of those whose hearts are troubled. All, who
dwell on earth, shall fall down and worship before him; shall bless and
glorify him, and sing praises to the name of the Lord of spirits.

5. Therefore the Elect and the Concealed One existed in his presence,
before the world was created, and for ever.

6. In his presence _he existed_, and has revealed to the saints and to
the righteous the wisdom of the Lord of spirits; for he has preserved
the lot of the righteous, because they have hated and rejected this
world of iniquity, and have detested all its works and ways, in the name
of the Lord of spirits.

7. For in his name shall they be preserved; and his will shall be their
life. In those days shall the kings of the earth and the mighty men, who
have gained the world by their achievements,[102] become humble in
countenance.

8. For in the day of their anxiety and trouble their souls shall not be
saved; and _they shall be_ in subjection to[103] those whom I have
chosen.

9. I will cast them like hay into the fire, and like lead into the
water. Thus shall they burn in the presence of the righteous, and sink
in the presence of the holy; nor shall a tenth part of them be found.

10. But in the day of their trouble, the world shall obtain
tranquillity.[104]

11. In his presence shall they fall, and not be raised up again; nor
shall there be any one to take them out of his hands, and to lift them
up: for they have denied the Lord of spirits, and his Messiah. The name
of the Lord of spirits shall be blessed.

Footnote 102:

  _by the work of their own hands._

Footnote 103:

  _in the hand of._

Footnote 104:

  _rest shall be on earth._




                           CHAP. XLVIII.[105]


1. Wisdom is poured forth like water, and glory fails not before him for
ever and ever; for potent is he in all the secrets of righteousness.

2. But iniquity passes away like a shadow, and possesses not a fixed
station: for the Elect One stands before the Lord of spirits; and his
glory is for ever and ever; and his power from generation to generation.

3. With him dwells the spirit of intellectual wisdom, the spirit of
instruction and of power, and the spirit of those who sleep in
righteousness; he shall judge secret things.

4. Nor shall any be able to utter a single word before him; for the
Elect One is in the presence of the Lord of spirits, according to his
own pleasure.

Footnote 105:

  Chap. xlviii. occurs twice.




                              CHAP. XLIX.


1. In those days the saints and the chosen shall undergo a change. The
light of day shall rest upon them; and the splendour and glory of the
saints shall be changed.

2. In the day of trouble evil shall be heaped up upon sinners; but the
righteous shall triumph in the name of the Lord of spirits.

3. Others shall be made to see, that they must repent, and forsake the
works of their hands; and that glory awaits them not in the presence of
the Lord of spirits; yet that by his name they may be saved. The Lord of
spirits will have compassion on them: for great is his mercy; and
righteousness is in his judgment, and in the presence of his glory; nor
in his judgment shall iniquity stand. He who repents not before him
shall perish.

4. Henceforward I will not have mercy on them, saith the Lord of
spirits.




                                CHAP. L.


1. In those days shall the earth deliver up from her womb, and hell
deliver up from hers, that which it has received; and destruction shall
restore that which it owes.

2. He shall select the righteous and holy from among them; for the day
of their salvation has approached.

3. And in those days shall the Elect One sit upon his throne, while
every secret of intellectual wisdom shall proceed from his mouth; for
the Lord of spirits has gifted and glorified him.

4. In those days the mountains shall skip like rams, and the hills shall
leap like young sheep[106] satiated with milk; and all _the righteous_
shall become angels in heaven.

5. Their countenance shall be bright with joy; for in those days shall
the Elect One be exalted. The earth shall rejoice; the righteous shall
inhabit it, and the elect possess it.[107]

Footnote 106:

  Psalm cxiv. 4.

Footnote 107:

  _go and walk upon it._




                               CHAP. LI.


1. After that period, in the place where I had seen every secret sight,
I was snatched up in a whirlwind, and carried off westwards.

2. There my eyes beheld the secrets of heaven, and all which existed on
earth; a mountain of iron, a mountain of copper,[108] a mountain of
silver, a mountain of gold, a mountain of fluid metal, and a mountain of
lead.

3. And I inquired of the angel who went with me, saying, What are these
things, which in secret I behold?

4. He said, All these things which thou beholdest shall be for the
dominion of the Messiah, that he may command, and be powerful upon
earth.

5. And that angel of peace answered me, saying, Wait but a short time,
and thou shalt understand, and every secret thing shall be revealed to
thee, which the Lord of spirits has decreed. Those mountains which thou
hast seen, the mountain of iron, the mountain of copper, the mountain of
silver, the mountain of gold, the mountain of fluid metal, and the
mountain of lead, all these in the presence of the Elect One shall be
like a honeycomb before the fire, and like water descending from above
upon these mountains; and shall become debilitated before his feet.

6. In those days men[109] shall not be saved by gold and by silver.

7. Nor shall they have it in their power to secure themselves, and to
fly.

8. There shall be neither iron for war, nor a coat of mail for the
breast.

9. Copper shall be useless; useless also that which neither rusts nor
consumes away; and lead shall not be coveted.

10. All these things shall be rejected, and perish from off the earth,
when the Elect One shall appear in the presence of the Lord of spirits.

Footnote 108:

  _nummus minutissimus. Obolus._

Footnote 109:

  _they._




                               CHAP. LII.


1. There my eyes beheld a deep valley; and wide was its entrance.

2. All who dwell on land, on the sea, and in islands, shall bring to it
gifts, presents, and offerings; yet that deep valley shall not be full.
Their hands shall commit iniquity. Whatsoever they produce by labour,
the sinners shall devour with crime. But they shall perish from the face
of the Lord of spirits, and from the face of his earth. They shall stand
up, and shall not fail for ever and ever.

3. I beheld the angels of punishment, who were dwelling _there_, and
preparing every instrument of Satan.

4. Then I inquired of the angel of peace, who proceeded with me, for
whom those instruments were preparing.

5. He said, These they are preparing for the kings and powerful ones of
the earth, that thus[110] they may perish.

6. After which the righteous and chosen house of his congregation shall
appear, thenceforward unchangeable, in the name of the Lord of spirits.

7. Nor shall those mountains exist in his presence, as the earth and the
hills, as the fountains of water _exist_. And the righteous shall be
relieved from the vexation of sinners.

Footnote 110:

  _by this._




                              CHAP. LIII.


1. Then I looked and turned myself to another part of the earth, where I
beheld a deep valley burning with fire.

2. To this valley they brought monarchs and the mighty.

3. And there my eyes beheld the instruments which they were making,
fetters of iron without weight.[111]

4. Then I inquired of the angel of peace, who proceeded with me, saying,
For whom are these fetters and instruments prepared?

5. He replied, These are prepared for the host of Azazeel, that they may
be delivered over and adjudged to the lowest condemnation; and that
their angels may be overwhelmed with hurled stones, as the Lord of
spirits has commanded.

6. Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel shall be strengthened in
that day, and shall then cast them into a furnace of blazing fire, that
the Lord of spirits may be avenged of them for their crimes; because
they became ministers of Satan, and seduced those who dwell upon earth.

7. In those days shall punishment go forth from the Lord of spirits; and
the receptacles of water which are above the heavens shall be opened,
and the fountains likewise, which are under the heavens and under the
earth.

8. All the waters, which are in the heavens and above them, shall be
mixed together.

9. The water which is above heaven shall be the agent;[112]

10. And the water which is under the earth shall be the recipient[113]:
and all shall be destroyed who dwell upon earth, and who dwell under the
extremities of heaven.

11. By these means shall they understand the iniquity which they have
committed on earth: and by these means shall they perish.

Footnote 111:

  _in which there was not weight._

Footnote 112:

  _male._

Footnote 113:

  _female._




                               CHAP. LIV.


1. Afterwards the Ancient of days repented, and said, In vain have I
destroyed all the inhabitants of the earth.

2. And he sware by his great name, _saying_, Henceforwards I will not
act thus towards all those who dwell upon earth.

3. But I will place a sign in the heavens;[114] and it shall be a
faithful witness[115] between me and them for ever, as long as the days
of heaven and earth last upon the earth.

4. Afterwards, according to this my decree, when I shall be disposed to
seize them beforehand, by the instrumentality of angels, in the day of
affliction and trouble, my wrath and my punishment shall remain upon
them, my punishment and my wrath, saith God the Lord of spirits.

5. O ye kings, O ye mighty, who inhabit the world, you shall behold my
Elect One, sitting upon the throne of my glory. And he shall judge
Azazeel, all his associates, and all his hosts, in the name of the Lord
of spirits.

6. There likewise I beheld hosts of angels who were moving in
punishment, confined in a net-work of iron and brass. Then I inquired of
the angel of peace, who proceeded with me, To whom those under
confinement were going.

7. He said, To each of their elect and their beloved, that they may be
cast into the fountains and deep recesses of the valley.

8. And that valley shall be filled with their elect and beloved; the
days of whose life shall be consumed, but the days of their error shall
be innumerable.

9. Then shall princes combine together, and conspire. The chiefs of the
east, among the Parthians and Medes, shall remove kings, in whom a
spirit of perturbation shall enter. They shall hurl them from their
thrones, springing as lions from their dens, and like famished wolves
into the midst of the flock.

10. They shall go up, and tread upon the land of their elect. The land
of their elect shall be before them. The threshing-floor, the path, and
the city of my righteous _people_ shall impede _the progress of_ their
horses. They shall rise up to destroy each other; their right hand shall
be strengthened; nor shall a man acknowledge his friend or his brother;

11. Nor the son his father and his mother; until the number of the dead
bodies shall be _completed_, by their death and punishment. Neither
shall this take place without cause.

12. In those days shall the mouth of hell be opened, into which they
shall be immerged; hell shall destroy and swallow up sinners from the
face of the elect.

Footnote 114:

  Gen. ix. 13. “I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a
  token of a covenant between me and the earth.”

Footnote 115:

   _faith_, or _fidelity_.




                               CHAP. LV.


1. After this I beheld another army of chariots, with men riding in
them.

2. And they came upon the wind from the east, from the west, and from
the south.[116]

3. The sound of the noise of their chariots was heard.

4. And when that agitation took place, the saints out of heaven
perceived it; the pillar of the earth shook from its foundation; and the
sound was heard from the extremities of the earth unto the extremities
of heaven at the same time.

5. Then they all fell down, and worshipped the Lord of spirits.

6. This is the end of the second parable.

Footnote 116:

  _from the midst of the day._ The army alluded to was probably Roman.




                      CHAP. LVI. [SECT. IX.[117]]


1. I now began to utter the third parable, concerning the saints and the
elect.

2. Blessed are ye, O saints and elect, for glorious is your lot.

3. The saints shall exist in the light of the sun, and the elect in the
light of everlasting life, the days of whose life shall never terminate;
nor shall the days of the saints be numbered, who seek for light, and
obtain righteousness with the Lord of spirits.

4. Peace be to the saints with the Lord of the world.

5. Henceforward shall the saints be told to seek in heaven the secrets
of righteousness, the portion of faith; for like the sun has it arisen
upon the earth, while darkness has passed away. There shall be light
interminable:[118] nor shall they enter upon the enumeration of time;
for darkness shall be previously destroyed, and light shall increase
before the Lord of spirits; before the Lord of spirits shall the light
of uprightness increase for ever.

Footnote 117:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 118:

  _which cannot be numbered._




                              CHAP. LVII.


1. In those days my eyes beheld the secrets of the lightnings and the
splendours, and the judgment belonging to them.

2. They lighten for a blessing and for a curse, according to the will of
the Lord of spirits.

3. And there I saw the secrets of the thunder, when it rattles[119]
above in heaven, and its sound is heard.

4. The habitations also of the earth were shown to me. The sound of the
thunder is for peace and for blessing, as well as for a curse, according
to the word of the Lord of spirits.

5. Afterwards every secret of the splendours and of the lightnings was
seen by me. For blessing and for fertility they lighten.

Footnote 119:

  _it is grinding_, as in a mortar.




                   CHAP. LVIII.[120] [SECT. X.[121]]


1. In the five hundredth year, and in the seventh month, on the
fourteenth _day_ of the month, of the lifetime of Enoch, in that
parable, I saw that the heaven of heavens shook; that it shook
violently; and that the powers of the Most High, and the angels,
thousands of thousands, and myriads of myriads, were agitated with great
agitation. And when I looked, the Ancient of days was sitting on the
throne of his glory, while the angels and saints were standing around
him. A great trembling came upon me, and terror seized me. My loins were
bowed down and loosened; my reins were dissolved; and I fell upon my
face. The holy Michael; another holy angel, one of the holy ones, was
sent, who raised me up.

2. And when he raised me, my spirit returned; for I was incapable of
enduring this vision of violence, its agitation, and the concussion of
heaven.

3. Then holy Michael said to me, Wherefore art thou disturbed at this
vision?

4. Hitherto has existed the day of mercy; and he has been merciful and
longsuffering towards all who dwell upon the earth.

5. But when the time shall come, then _shall_ the power, the punishment,
and the judgment _take place_, which the Lord of spirits has prepared
for those who prostrate themselves to the judgment of righteousness, for
those who abjure that judgment, and for those who take _his_ name in
vain.

6. That day has been prepared for the elect _as a day of_ covenant; and
for sinners _as a day of_ inquisition.

7. In that day shall be distributed _for food_ two monsters; a female
monster, whose name is Leviathan, dwelling in the depths of the sea,
above the springs of waters;

8. And a male _monster_, whose name is Behemoth; which possesses,
_moving_ on his breast, the invisible wilderness.

9. His name was Dendayen in the east of the garden, where the elect and
the righteous will dwell; where he received _it_ from my ancestor, who
was man, from Adam the first of men, whom the Lord of spirits made.

10. Then I asked of another angel to show me the power of those
monsters, how they became separated on the same day, one _being_ in the
depths of the sea, and one in the dry desert.

11. And he said, Thou, son of man, art here desirous of understanding
secret things.

12.[122] And the angel of peace, who was with me, said, These two
monsters are by the power of God prepared to become food, that the
punishment of God may not be in vain.

13. Then shall children be slain with their mothers, and sons with their
fathers.

14. And when the punishment of the Lord of spirits shall continue, upon
them shall it continue, that the punishment of the Lord of spirits may
not take place in vain. After that, judgment shall exist with mercy and
longsuffering.

Footnote 120:

  There is no chap. lviii. in the MS. I have therefore divided chap.
  lix. into two parts, denominating this first part chap. lviii.

Footnote 121:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 122:

  These last three verses, viz. 12, 13, 14, are placed in both MSS. at
  the end of chap. lix.; but they so evidently belong to this account of
  the Leviathan and Behemoth, that I have ventured to insert them here.




                               CHAP. LIX.


1. Then another angel, who proceeded with me, spoke to me;

2. And showed me the first and last secrets in heaven above, and in the
depths of the earth:

3. In the extremities of heaven, and in the foundations of it, and in
the receptacle of the winds.

4. _He showed me_ how their spirits were divided; how they were
balanced; and how both the springs and the winds were numbered according
to the force of their spirit.

5. _He showed me_ the power of the moon’s light, that its power is a
just one; as well as the divisions of the stars, according to their
respective names;

6. _That_ every division is divided; that the lightning flashes;

7. That its troops[123] immediately obey; and that a cessation takes
place during thunder in continuance of its sound. Nor are the thunder
and the lightning separated; neither do both of them move with one
spirit; yet are they not separated.

8. For when the lightning lightens, the thunder sounds, and the spirit
at a proper period pauses, making an equal division between them; for
the receptacle, upon which their periods depend, is _loose_ as
sand.[124] Each of them at a proper season is restrained with a bridle;
and turned by the power of the spirit, which thus propels _them_
according to the spacious extent of the earth.

9. The spirit likewise of the sea is potent and strong; and as a strong
power causes it to ebb,[125] so is it driven forwards, and scattered
against the mountains of the earth. The spirit of the frost has its
angel; in the spirit of hail there is a good angel; the spirit of snow
ceases in its strength, and a solitary spirit is in it, which ascends
from it like vapour, and is called refrigeration.

10. The spirit also of mist dwells with them in their receptacle; but it
has a receptacle to itself; for its progress is in splendour,

11. In light, and in darkness, in winter and in summer. Its receptacle
is bright, and an angel is _in it_.

12. The spirit of dew _has_ its abode in the extremities of heaven, in
connection with the receptacle of rain; and its progress is in winter
and in summer. The cloud produced by it, and the cloud of the mist,
become united; one gives to the other; and when the spirit of rain is in
motion from its receptacle, angels come, and opening its receptacle,
bring it forth.

13. When likewise it is sprinkled over all the earth, it forms an union
with every kind of water on the ground; for the waters remain on the
ground, because _they afford_ nourishment to the earth from the Most
High, who is in heaven.

14. Upon this account therefore there is a regulation in the quantity of
rain,[126] which the angels receive.

15. These things I saw; all of them, even paradise.[127]

Footnote 123:

  _Their host._

Footnote 124:

  _the receptacle of their times_ is _what sand is_.

Footnote 125:

  _turns it back with a bridle._

Footnote 126:

  _a measure in the rain._

Footnote 127:

  _even to the garden of the righteous._




                               CHAP. LX.


1. In those days I beheld long ropes given to those angels; who took to
their wings, and fled, advancing towards the north.

2. And I inquired of the angel, saying, Wherefore have they taken those
long ropes, and gone forth? He said, They are gone forth to measure.

3. The angel, who proceeded with me, said, These are the measures of the
righteous; and cords shall the righteous bring, that they may trust
in[128] the name of the Lord of spirits for ever and ever.

4. The elect shall begin to dwell with the elect.

5. And these are the measures which shall be given to faith, and _which_
shall strengthen the words of righteousness.

6. These measures shall reveal all the secrets in the depth of the
earth.

7. And _it shall be_, that those who have been destroyed in the desert,
and who have been devoured by the fish of the sea, and by wild beasts,
shall return, and trust in[129] the day of the Elect One; for none shall
perish in the presence of the Lord of spirits, nor shall any be capable
of perishing.

8. Then they received the commandment, all _who were_ in the heavens
above; to whom a combined power, voice, and splendour, like fire, were
given.

9. And first, with _their_ voice, they blessed him, they exalted him,
they glorified him with wisdom, and ascribed to him wisdom with the
word, and with the breath of life.

10. Then the Lord of spirits seated upon the throne of his glory the
Elect One;

11. Who shall judge all the works of the holy, in heaven above, and in a
balance shall he weigh their actions. And when he shall lift up his
countenance to judge their secret ways in the word of the name of the
Lord of spirits, and their progress in the path of the righteous
judgment of God most high;

12. They shall all speak with united voice; and bless, glorify, exalt,
and praise, in the name of the Lord of spirits.

13. He shall call to every power of the heavens, to all the holy above,
and to the power of God. The Cherubim, the Seraphim, and the Ophanin,
all the angels of power, and all the angels of the Lords, namely, of the
Elect One, and of the other Power, who _was_ upon earth over the water
on that day,

14. Shall raise their united voice; shall bless, glorify, praise, and
exalt with the spirit of faith, with the spirit of wisdom and patience,
with the spirit of mercy, with the spirit of judgment and peace, and
with the spirit of benevolence; all shall say with united voice: Blessed
is He; and the name of the Lord of spirits shall be blessed for ever and
for ever; all, who sleep not, shall bless it in heaven above.

15. All the holy in heaven shall bless it; all the elect who dwell in
the garden of life; and every spirit of light, who is capable of
blessing, glorifying, exalting, and praising thy holy name; and every
mortal man,[130] more than the powers _of heaven_, shall glorify and
bless thy name for ever and ever.

16. For great is the mercy of the Lord of spirits; long-suffering is he;
and all his works, all his power, great as are the things which he has
done, has he revealed to the saints and to the elect, in the name of the
Lord of spirits.

Footnote 128:

  _lean upon._

Footnote 129:

  _lean upon._

Footnote 130:

  _all of flesh._




                               CHAP. LXI.


1. Thus the Lord commanded the kings, the princes, the exalted, and
those who dwell on earth, saying, Open your eyes, and lift up your
horns, if you are capable of comprehending the Elect One.

2. The Lord of spirits sat upon the throne of his glory.

3. And the spirit of righteousness was poured out over him.

4. The word of his mouth shall destroy all the sinners and all the
ungodly, who shall perish at his presence.

5. In that day shall all the kings, the princes, the exalted, and those
who possess the earth, stand up, behold, and perceive, that he is
sitting on the throne of his glory; that before him the saints shall be
judged in righteousness;

6. And that nothing, which shall be spoken before him, shall be _spoken_
in vain.

7. Trouble shall come upon them, as upon a woman in travail, whose
labour is severe, when her child comes to the mouth of the womb, and she
finds it difficult to bring forth.

8. One portion of them shall look upon another. They shall be
astonished, and shall humble their countenance;

9. And trouble shall seize them, when they shall behold this Son of
woman sitting upon the throne of his glory.

10. Then shall the kings, the princes, and all who possess the earth,
glorify him who has dominion over all things, him who was concealed; for
from the beginning the Son of man existed in secret,[131] whom the Most
High preserved in the presence of his power, and revealed to the elect.

11. He shall sow the congregation of the saints, and of the elect; and
all the elect shall stand before him in that day.

12. All the kings, the princes, the exalted, and those who rule over the
earth, shall fall down on their faces before him, and shall worship him.

13. They shall fix their hopes on this Son of man, shall pray to him,
and petition him for mercy.

14. Then shall the Lord of spirits hasten to expel them from his
presence. Their faces shall be full of confusion, and their faces shall
darkness cover.[132] The angels shall take them to punishment, that
vengeance may be inflicted on those who have oppressed his children and
his elect. And they shall become an example to the saints and to his
elect. Through them shall these be made joyful; for the anger of the
Lord of spirits shall rest upon them.

15. Then the sword of the Lord of spirits shall be drunk with their
blood;[133] but the saints and elect shall be safe in that day; nor the
face of the sinners and the ungodly shall they thenceforwards behold.

16. The Lord of spirits shall remain over them:

17. And with this Son of man shall they dwell, eat, lie down, and rise
up, for ever and ever.

18. The saints and the elect have arisen from the earth, have left off
to depress their countenances, and have been clothed with the garment of
life. That garment of life is with the Lord of spirits, in whose
presence your garment shall not wax old, nor shall your glory diminish.

Footnote 131:

  _was concealed._

Footnote 132:

  _be added to their faces._

Footnote 133:

  _be drunk from them._




                              CHAP. LXII.


1. In those days the kings who possess the earth shall be punished by
the angels of his wrath,[134] wheresoever they shall be delivered up,
that he may give rest for a short period; and that they may fall down
and worship before the Lord of spirits, confessing their sins before
him.

2. They shall bless and glorify the Lord of spirits, saying, Blessed is
the Lord of spirits, the Lord of kings, the Lord of princes, the Lord of
the rich, the Lord of glory, and the Lord of wisdom.

3. He shall enlighten every secret thing.

4. Thy power is from generation to generation; and thy glory for ever
and ever.

5. Deep are all thy secrets, and numberless; and thy righteousness
cannot be computed.

6. Now we know, that we should glorify and bless the Lord of kings, him
who is King over all things.

7. They shall also say, Who has granted us rest to glorify, laud, bless,
and confess in the presence of his glory?

8. And now small is the rest we desire; but we do not find _it_; we
reject, and do not possess _it_. Light has passed away from before us;
and darkness _has covered_ our thrones for ever.

9. For we have not confessed before him; we have not glorified the name
of the Lord of kings; we have not glorified the Lord in all his works;
but we have trusted in the sceptre of our dominion and of our glory.

10. In the day of our suffering and of our trouble he will not save us,
neither shall we find rest. We confess that our Lord is faithful in all
his works, in all his judgments, and in his righteousness.

11. In his judgments he pays no respect to persons; and we must depart
from his presence, on account of our _evil_ deeds.

12. All our sins are truly without number.

13. Then shall they say to themselves, Our souls are satiated with the
instruments of crime;

14. But that prevents us not from descending to the flaming womb of
hell.

15. Afterwards, their countenances shall be filled with darkness and
confusion before the Son of man; from whose presence they shall be
expelled, and before whom the sword shall remain to expel them.

16. Thus saith the Lord of spirits, This is the decree and the judgment
against the princes, the kings, the exalted, and those who possess the
earth, in the presence of the Lord of spirits.

Footnote 134:

  _punishment._




                              CHAP. LXIII.


1. I saw also other countenances in that secret place. I heard the voice
of an angel, saying, These are the angels who have descended from heaven
to earth, and have revealed secrets to the sons of men, and have seduced
the sons of men to the commission of sin.




                      CHAP. LXIV. [SECT. XI.[135]]


1. In those days Noah saw that the earth became inclined, and that
destruction approached.

2. Then he lifted up his feet, and went to the ends of the earth, to the
dwelling of his great-grandfather Enoch.

3. And Noah cried with a bitter voice, Hear me; hear me; hear me: three
times. And he said, Tell me what is transacting upon earth; for the
earth labours, and is violently shaken. Surely I shall perish with it.

4. After this there was a great perturbation on earth, and a voice was
heard from heaven. I fell down on my face, when my great-grandfather
Enoch came and stood by me.

5. He said to me, Why hast thou cried out to me with a bitter cry and
lamentation?

6. A commandment has gone forth from the Lord against those who dwell on
the earth, that they may be destroyed;[136] for they know every secret
of the angels, every oppressive and secret power of the devils,[137] and
every power of those who commit sorcery, as well as of those who make
molten _images_ in the whole earth.

7. _They know_ how silver is produced from the dust of the earth, and
how on the earth the _metallic_ drop exists; for lead and tin are not
produced from earth, as the primary fountain of their production.

8. There is an angel standing upon it, and that angel struggles to
prevail.

9. Afterwards my great-grandfather Enoch seized me with his hand,
raising me up, and saying to me, Go, for I have asked the Lord of
spirits respecting this perturbation of the earth; who replied, On
account of their impiety have their innumerable judgments been
consummated before me. Respecting the moons have they inquired, and they
have known that the earth will perish with those who dwell upon it, and
that to these there will be _no place of_ refuge for ever.

10. They have discovered secrets, and _they are_ those who have been
judged; but not thou, my son. The Lord of spirits knows that thou art
pure and good, _free_ from the reproach of _discovering_ secrets.

11. He, the holy One, will establish thy name in the midst of the
saints, and will preserve thee from those who dwell upon the earth. He
will establish thy seed in righteousness, with dominion and great
glory;[138] and from thy seed shall spring forth[139] righteous and holy
men without number for ever.

Footnote 135:

  Chapters lxiv. lxv. lxvi. and the first verse of lxvii. evidently
  contain a vision of Noah, and not of Enoch.

Footnote 136:

  _their end may be._

Footnote 137:

  _the Satans._

Footnote 138:

  _for kings, and for great glory._

Footnote 139:

  _shall go forth a spring of._




                               CHAP. LXV.


1. After this he showed me the angels of punishment, who were prepared
to come, and to open all the mighty waters[140] under the earth:

2. That they may be for judgment, and for the destruction of all those
who remain and dwell upon the earth.

3. And the Lord of spirits commanded the angels who went forth, not to
take up the men and preserve _them_.

4. For those angels _presided_ over all the mighty waters. Then I went
out from the presence of Enoch.

Footnote 140:

  _the power of water._




                              CHAP. LXVI.


1. In those days the word of God came to me,[141] and said, Noah,
behold, thy lot[142] has ascended up to me, a lot void of crime,[143] a
lot beloved[144] and upright.

2. Now then shall the angels labour at the trees; but when they proceed
to this, I will put my hand upon it, and preserve it.

3. The seed of life shall arise[145] from it, and a change shall take
place,[146] that the dry land may not be left empty. I will establish
thy seed before me for ever and ever, and the seed of those who dwell
with thee on the surface of the earth. It shall be blessed and
multiplied in the presence of the earth, in the name of the Lord.

4. And they shall confine those angels who disclosed impiety. In that
burning valley _it is, that they shall be confined_, which at first my
great-grandfather Enoch showed me in the west, where there were
mountains of gold and silver, of iron, of fluid metal, and of tin.

5. I beheld that valley in which there was great perturbation, and
_where_ the waters were troubled.

6. And when all this was effected, from the fluid mass of fire, and the
perturbation which prevailed[147] in that place, there arose a strong
smell of sulphur, which became mixed with the waters; and the valley of
the angels, who had been guilty of seduction, burned underneath its
soil.

7. Through that valley also rivers of fire were flowing,[148] to which
those angels shall be condemned, who seduced the inhabitants of the
earth.

8. And in those days shall these waters be to kings, to princes, to the
exalted, and to the inhabitants of the earth, for the healing of the
soul and body, and for the judgment of the spirit.

9. Their spirits shall be full of revelry,[149] that they may be judged
in their bodies; because they have denied the Lord of spirits, and
_although_ they perceive their condemnation day by day, they believe not
in his name.

10. And as the inflammation of their bodies shall be great, so shall
their spirits undergo a change for ever.

11. For no word which is uttered before the Lord of spirits shall be in
vain.

12. Judgment has come upon them, because they trusted in their carnal
revelry,[150] and denied the Lord of spirits.

13. In those days shall the waters of that valley[151] be changed; for
when the angels shall be judged, then shall the heat of those springs of
water experience an alteration.

14. And when the angels shall ascend, the water of the springs shall
_again_ undergo a change, and be frozen. Then I heard holy Michael
answering and saying, This judgment, with which the angels shall be
judged, shall bear testimony against the kings, the princes, and those
who possess the earth.

15. For these waters of judgment shall be for their healing, and for the
death of their bodies. But they shall not perceive and believe that the
waters will be changed, and become a fire, which shall blaze for ever.

Footnote 141:

  _was with me._

Footnote 142:

  _portion._

Footnote 143:

  _fault._

Footnote 144:

  _of love._

Footnote 145:

  _be._

Footnote 146:

  _shall enter._

Footnote 147:

  _troubled them._

Footnote 148:

  _went._

Footnote 149:

  _sport._

Footnote 150:

  _sport of their bodies._

Footnote 151:

  _its waters._




                              CHAP. LXVII.


1. After this he gave me the characteristical marks[152] of all the
secret things in the book of my great-grandfather Enoch, and in the
parables which had been given to him; inserting them for me among the
words of the book of parables.

2. At that time holy Michael answered and said to Raphael, The power of
the spirit hurries me away, and impels me on.[153] The severity of the
judgment, of the secret judgment of the angels, who is capable _of
beholding_—the endurance of that severe judgment which has taken place
and been made permanent—without being melted at the sight of it?[154]
Again holy Michael answered and said to holy Raphael, Who is there whose
heart is not softened by it, and whose reins are not troubled at this
thing?

3. Judgment has gone forth against them by those who have thus dragged
them away; and that was, when they stood in the presence of the Lord of
spirits.

4. In like manner also holy Rakael said to Raphael, They shall not be
before the eye of the Lord; since the Lord of spirits has been offended
with them; for like Lords[155] have they conducted themselves. Therefore
will he bring upon them a secret judgment for ever and ever.

5. For neither shall angel nor man receive a portion of it; but they
alone shall receive their own judgment for ever and ever.

Footnote 152:

  _the signs._

Footnote 153:

  _irritates_ or _excites me_.

Footnote 154:

  _and not be melted in the presence of it._

Footnote 155:

  _in the similitude of_, or, _as the Lord_.




                             CHAP. LXVIII.


1. After this judgment they shall be astonished and irritated; for it
shall be exhibited to the inhabitants of the earth.

2. Behold the names of those angels. These are their names. The first of
them is Samyaza; the second, Arstikapha; the third, Armen; the fourth,
Kakabael; the fifth, Turel; the sixth, Rumyel; the seventh, Danyal; the
eighth, Kael; the ninth, Barakel; the tenth, Azazel; the eleventh,
Armers; the twelfth, Bataryal; the thirteenth, Basasael; the fourteenth,
Ananel; the fifteenth, Turyal; the sixteenth, Simapiseel; the
seventeenth, Yetarel; the eighteenth, Tumael; the nineteenth, Tarel; the
twentieth, Rumel; the twenty-first, Azazyel.

3. These are the chiefs of their angels, and the names of the leaders of
their hundreds, and the leaders of their fifties, and the leaders of
their tens.

4. The name of the first is Yekun: he it was who seduced all the sons of
the holy angels; and causing them to descend on earth, led astray the
offspring of men.

5. The name of the second is Kesabel, who pointed out evil counsel to
the sons of the holy angels, and induced them to corrupt their bodies by
generating mankind.

6. The name of the third is Gadrel: he discovered every stroke of death
to the children of men.

7. He seduced Eve; and discovered to the children of men the instruments
of death, the coat of mail, the shield, and the sword for slaughter;
every instrument of death to the children of men.

8. From his hand were _these things_ derived to them who dwell upon
earth, from that period for ever.

9. The name of the fourth is Penemue: he discovered to the children of
men bitterness and sweetness;

10. And pointed out to them every secret of their wisdom.

11. He taught men to understand writing, and _the use of_ ink and paper.

12. Therefore numerous have been those who have gone astray from every
period of the world, even to this day.

13. For men were not born for this, thus with pen and with ink to
confirm their faith;

14. Since they were not created, except that, like the angels, they
might remain righteous and pure.

15. Nor would death, which destroys everything, have affected them;

16. But by this their knowledge they perish, and by this also _its_
power consumes[156] _them_.

17. The name of the fifth is Kasyade: he discovered to the children of
men every wicked stroke of spirits and of demons:

18. The stroke of the embryo in the womb, to diminish _it_; the stroke
of the spirit _by_ the bite of the serpent, and the stroke which is
_given_ in the mid-day _by_ the offspring of the serpent, the name of
which is Tabaet.[157]

19. This is the number of the Kesbel; the principal part of the oath
which the Most High, dwelling in glory, revealed to the holy ones.

20. Its name is Beka. He spoke to holy Michael to discover to them the
sacred name, that they might understand that secret name, and thus
remember the oath; and that those who pointed out every secret thing to
the children of men might tremble at that name and oath.

21. This is the power of that oath; for powerful it is, and strong.

22. And he established this oath of Akae by the instrumentality[158] of
the holy Michael.

23. These are the secrets of this oath, and by it were they confirmed.

24. Heaven was suspended _by it_ before the world was made, for ever.

25. By it has the earth been founded upon the flood; while from the
concealed parts of the hills the agitated waters proceed forth from the
creation to the end of the world.

26. By this oath the sea has been formed, and the foundation of it.

27. During the period of _its_ fury he has established the sand against
it, which continues unchanged for ever; and by this oath the abyss has
been made strong; nor is it removable from its station for ever and
ever.

28. By this oath the sun and moon complete their progress, never
swerving from the command _given_ to them for ever and ever.

29. By this oath the stars complete their progress;

30. And when their names are called, they return an answer, for ever and
ever.

31. Thus _in_ the heavens _take place_ the blowings of the winds: all of
them have breathings,[159] and _effect_ a complete combination of
breathings.

32. There the treasures of thunder are kept, and the splendour of the
lightning.

33. There are kept the treasures of hail and of frost, the treasures of
snow, the treasures of rain and of dew.

34. All these confess and laud before the Lord of spirits.

35. They glorify with all their power of praise; and he sustains them in
all that _act of_ thanksgiving; while they laud, glorify, and exalt the
name of the Lord of spirits for ever and ever.

36. And with them he establishes this oath, by which they and their
paths are preserved; nor does their progress perish.

37. Great was their joy.

38. They blessed, glorified, and exalted, because the name of the Son of
man was revealed to them.

39. He sat upon the throne of his glory; and the principal part of the
judgment was assigned to him, the Son of man. Sinners shall disappear
and perish from the face of the earth, while those who seduced them
shall be bound with chains for ever.

40. According to their ranks of corruption shall they be imprisoned, and
all their works shall disappear from the face of the earth; nor
thenceforward shall there be any to corrupt; for the Son of man has been
seen, sitting on the throne of his glory.

41. Everything wicked shall disappear, and depart from before his face;
and the word of the Son of man shall become powerful in the presence of
the Lord of spirits.

42. This is the third parable of Enoch.

Footnote 156:

  _eats, feeds upon, devours._

Footnote 157:

  _male._

Footnote 158:

  _by the hands._

Footnote 159:

  or _spirits_.




                     CHAP. LXIX. [SECT. XII.[160]]


1. After this the name of the Son of man, living with the Lord of
spirits,[161] was exalted by the inhabitants of the earth.

2. It was exalted in the chariots of the Spirit; and the name went forth
in the midst of them.

3. From that time I was not drawn in the midst of them; but he seated me
between two spirits, between the north and the west, where the angels
received their ropes, to measure out a place[162] for the elect and the
righteous.

4. There I beheld the fathers of the first men, and the saints, who
dwell in that place for ever.

Footnote 160:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 161:

  _the name of him living with him, of this Son of man, living with the
  Lord of spirits._

Footnote 162:

  _to measure me a place._




                               CHAP. LXX.


1. Afterwards my spirit was concealed, ascending into the heavens. I
beheld the sons of the holy angels treading on flaming fire, whose
garments and robes were white, and whose countenances were transparent
as crystal.

2. I saw two rivers of fire glittering like the hyacinth.

3. Then I fell on my face before the Lord of spirits.

4. And Michael, one of the archangels, took me by my right hand, raised
me up, and brought me out _to_ where _was_ every secret _of_ mercy and
secret _of_ righteousness.

5. He showed me all the hidden things of the extremities of heaven, all
the receptacles of the stars, and the splendours of all, from whence
they went forth before the face of the holy.

6. And he concealed the spirit of Enoch in the heaven of heavens.

7. There I beheld, in the midst of that light, a building raised with
stones of ice;[163]

8. And in the midst of these stones vibrations[164] of living fire. My
spirit saw around the circle of[165] this flaming habitation, on one of
its extremities, _that there were_ rivers full of living fire, which
encompassed it.

9. Then the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and Ophanin surrounded _it_: these
are those who never sleep, but watch the throne of his glory.

10. And I beheld angels innumerable, thousands of thousands, and myriads
of myriads, who surrounded that habitation.

11. Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Phanuel, and the holy angels who were in
the heavens above, went in and out of it. Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel
went out of that habitation, and holy angels innumerable.

12. With them _was_ the Ancient of days, whose head _was_ white as wool,
and pure, and his robe _was_ indescribable.

13. Then I fell upon my face, while all my flesh was dissolved, and my
spirit became changed.

14. I cried out with a loud voice, with a powerful spirit, blessing,
glorifying, and exalting.

15. And those blessings, which proceeded from my mouth, became
acceptable in the presence of the Ancient of days.

16. The Ancient of days came with Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and
Phanuel, with thousands of thousands, and myriads of myriads, which
could not be numbered.

17. Then that angel came to me, and with his voice saluted me, saying,
Thou art the offspring of man, who art born for righteousness, and
righteousness has rested on thee.

18. The righteousness of the Ancient of days shall not forsake thee.

19. He said, On thee shall he confer peace[166] in the name of the
existing world; for from thence has peace gone forth since the world was
created.

20. And thus shall it happen to thee for ever and ever.

21. All who shall exist, and who shall walk in thy path of
righteousness, shall not forsake thee for ever.

22. With thee shall be their habitations, with thee their lot; nor from
thee shall they be separated for ever and ever.

23. And thus shall length of days be with the offspring of man.

24. Peace shall be to the righteous; and the path of integrity shall the
righteous pursue,[167] in the name of the Lord of spirits, for ever and
ever.

Footnote 163:

  _that in it_ there was _that which was built with stones of ice_.

Footnote 164:

  _tongues._

Footnote 165:

  _around that which encompassed._

Footnote 166:

  _he shall call to thee peace._

Footnote 167:

  _his upright path_ shall be _to the righteous_.




                     CHAP. LXXI. [SECT. XIII.[168]]


1. The book of the revolutions of the luminaries of heaven, according to
their respective classes, their respective powers, their respective
periods, their respective names, the places where they commence their
progress,[169] and their respective months, which Uriel, the holy angel
who was with me, explained to me; he who conducts them. The whole
account of them, according to every year of the world for ever, until a
new work shall be effected, which will be eternal.

2. This is the first law of the luminaries. The sun _and_ the light
arrive at the gates of heaven, which are on the east, and on the west of
it at the western gates of heaven.

3. I beheld the gates whence the sun goes forth; and the gates where the
sun sets;

4. In which gates also the moon rises and sets; and _I beheld_ the
conductors of the stars, among those who precede them; six _gates were_
at the rising, and six at the setting of the sun.

5. All these respectively, one after another, are on a level; and
numerous windows are on the right and on the left sides of those gates.

6. First proceeds forth that great luminary, which is called the sun;
the orb of which is as the orb of heaven, the whole of it being replete
with splendid and flaming fire.

7. Its chariot, where it ascends, the wind blows.

8. The sun sets in heaven, and, returning by the north, to proceed
towards the east, is conducted so as to enter by that gate, and
illuminate the face of heaven.

9. In the same manner it goes forth in the first month by a great gate.

10. It goes forth through the fourth of those six gates, which are at
the rising of the sun.

11. And in the fourth gate, through which the sun with the moon
proceeds, in the first part of it, there are twelve open windows; from
which issues out a flame, when they are opened at their proper periods.

12. When the sun rises in heaven, it goes forth through this fourth gate
thirty days, and by the fourth gate in the west of heaven on a level
with it descends.

13. During that period the day is lengthened from the day, and the night
curtailed from the night for thirty days. And then the day is longer by
two parts than the night.

14. The day is precisely ten parts, and the night is eight.

15. The sun[170] goes forth through this fourth gate, and sets in it,
and turns to the fifth gate during thirty days; after which it proceeds
from, and sets in, the fifth gate.

16. Then the day becomes lengthened by a second portion, so that it is
eleven parts: while the night becomes shortened, and is only seven
parts.

17. The sun _now_ returns to the east, entering into the sixth gate, and
rising and setting in the sixth gate thirty-one days, on account of its
signs.

18. At that period the day is longer than the night, being twice _as
long as_ the night; and becomes twelve parts;

19. But the night is shortened, and becomes six parts. Then the sun
rises up, that the day may be shortened, and the night lengthened.

20. And the sun returns towards the east, entering into the sixth gate,
where it rises and sets for thirty days.

21. When that period is completed, the day becomes shortened precisely
one part, so that it is eleven parts, while the night is seven parts.

22. Then the sun goes from the west, from that sixth gate, and proceeds
eastwards, rising in the fifth gate for thirty days, and setting again
westwards in the fifth gate of the west.

23. At that period the day becomes shortened two parts; and is ten
parts, while the night is eight parts.

24. Then the sun goes from the fifth gate, as it sets in the fifth gate
of the west; and rises in the fourth gate for thirty-one days, on
account of its signs, setting in the west.

25. At that period the day is made equal with the night; and, being
equal with it, the night becomes nine parts, and the day nine parts.

26. Then the sun goes from that gate, as it sets in the west; and
returning to the east proceeds by the third gate for thirty days,
setting in the west at the third gate.

27. At that period the night is lengthened from the day during thirty
mornings, and the day is curtailed from the day during thirty days; the
night being ten parts precisely, and the day eight parts.

28. The sun now goes from the third gate, as it sets in the third gate
in the west; but returning to the east, it proceeds by the second gate
of the east for thirty days.

29. In like manner also it sets in the second gate in the west of
heaven.

30. At that period the night is eleven parts, and the day seven parts.

31. Then the sun goes at that time from the second gate, as it sets in
the second gate in the west; but returns to the east, _proceeding_ by
the first gate, for thirty-one days.

32. And sets in the west in the first[171] gate.

33. At that period the night is lengthened as much again as the day.

34. It is twelve[172] parts precisely, while the day is six parts.

35. The sun has _thus_ completed its beginnings, and a second time goes
round from these beginnings.

36. Into that gate it enters for thirty days, and sets in the west, in
the opposite part _of heaven_.

37. At that period the night is contracted in its length a fourth part,
that is, one portion, and becomes eleven parts.

38. The day is seven parts.

39. Then the sun returns, and enters into the second gate of the east.

40. It returns by these beginnings thirty days, rising and setting.

41. At that period the night is contracted in its length. It becomes
ten[173] parts, and the day eight parts. Then the sun goes from that
second gate, and sets in the west; but returns to the east, and rises in
the east, in the third gate, thirty-one days, setting in the west of
heaven.

42. At that period the night becomes shortened. It is nine parts. And
the night is equal with the day. The year is precisely three hundred and
sixty-four days.

43. The lengthening of the day and night, and the contraction of the day
and night, are made to differ from each other by the progress of the
sun.

44. By means of this progress the day is daily lengthened, and the night
greatly shortened.[174]

45. This is the law and progress of the sun, and its turning when it
turns back, turning during sixty days,[175] and going forth. This is the
great everlasting luminary, that which he names the sun for ever and
ever.

46. This also is that which goes forth a great luminary, and which is
named after its peculiar kind, as God commanded.

47. And thus it goes in and out, neither slackening nor resting; but
running on in its chariot by day and by night. It shines with a seventh
portion of light from the moon; but the dimensions of both are equal.

Footnote 168:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 169:

  _the places of their nativity._

Footnote 170:

  _And he._

Footnote 171:

  _second._ A manifest error. The Paris MS. is correct.

Footnote 172:

  _eleven._ A mistake of the transcriber. In the Paris MS. it is
  _twelve_.

Footnote 173:

  _seven._ Another error.

Footnote 174:

  _approaches._

Footnote 175:

  That is, it is sixty days in the same gates, viz. thirty days twice
  every year.




                     CHAP. LXXII. [SECT. XIV.[176]]


1. After this law I beheld another law of an inferior luminary, the name
of which is the moon, and the orb of which is as the orb of heaven.

2. Its chariot, _which_ it secretly ascends, the wind blows; and light
is given to it by measure.

3. Every month at its exit and entrance it becomes changed; and its
periods are as the periods of the sun. And when in like manner its light
is to exist, its light is a seventh portion from the light of the sun.

4. Thus it rises, and at its commencement towards the east goes forth
for thirty days.

5. At that time it appears, and becomes to you the beginning of the
month. Thirty days _it is_ with the sun in the gate from which the sun
goes forth.

6. Half of it is in extent seven portions, one _half_; and the whole of
its orb is void of light, except a seventh portion out of the fourteen
portions of its light. And in a day it receives a seventh portion, or
half _that portion_, of its light. Its light is by sevens, by one
portion, and by the half _of a portion_. It sets with the sun.

7. And when the sun rises, the moon rises with it; receiving half a
portion of light.

8. On that night, when it commences its period,[177] previously to the
day of the month, the moon sets with the sun.

9. And on that night it is dark _in_ its fourteen portions, that is, _in
each_ half; but it rises on that day with one seventh portion precisely,
and in its progress declines from the rising of the sun.

10. During the remainder of its period[178] its light increases to
fourteen portions.

Footnote 176:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 177:

  _at the beginning of its morning_, or _day_.

Footnote 178:

  _of its day._




                             CHAP. LXXIII.


1. Then I saw another progress and regulation which He effected in the
law of the moon.[179] The progress of the moons, and everything
_relating to them_, Uriel showed me, the holy angel who conducted them
all.

2. Their stations I wrote down as he showed them to me.

3. I wrote down their months, as they occur, and the appearance of their
light, until it is completed in fifteen days.

4. In each of its two seven portions it completes all its light at
rising and at setting.

5. On stated months it changes _its_ settings; and on stated months it
makes its progress _through_ each _gate_. In two _gates_ the moon sets
with the sun, _viz._ in those two gates which are in the midst, in the
third and fourth gate. _From the third gate_ it goes forth for seven
days, and makes its circuit.

6. Again it returns to the gate whence the sun goes forth, and in that
completes the whole of its light. Then it declines from the sun, and
enters in eight days into the sixth gate, _and returns in seven days to
the third gate_, from which the sun goes forth.

7. When the sun proceeds to the fourth gate, the _moon_ goes forth for
seven days, until it passes from the fifth _gate_.

8. Again it returns in seven days to the fourth gate, and completing all
its light, declines, and passes on by the first gate in eight days;

9. And returns in seven days to the fourth gate, from which the sun goes
forth.

10. Thus I beheld their stations, as according to the fixed order of the
months the sun rises and sets.

11. At those times there is an excess of thirty days belonging to the
sun in five years; all the days belonging to each year of the five
years, when completed, amount to three hundred and sixty-four days; and
to the sun and stars belong six days; six days in each of the five
years; _thus_ thirty days belong to them;

12. So that the moon has thirty days less than the sun and stars.

13. The moon brings on all the years exactly, that their stations may
come neither too forwards nor too backwards a single day; but that the
years may be changed with correct precision in three hundred and
sixty-four days. In three years the days are one thousand and
ninety-two; in five years they are one thousand eight hundred and
twenty; and in eight years two thousand nine hundred and twelve days.

14. To the moon alone belong in three years one thousand and sixty-two
days; in five years it has fifty days less _than the sun_, for an
addition being made to the _one thousand and_ sixty-two days, in five
years there are one thousand seven hundred and seventy days; and the
days of the moon in eight years are two thousand eight hundred and
thirty-two days.

15. For its days in eight years are less _than those of the sun by_
eighty days, which eighty days are its diminution in eight years.

16. The year then becomes truly complete according to the station of the
moons, and the station of the sun; which rise in the _different_ gates;
which rise and set in them for thirty days.

Footnote 179:

  _in that law._




                              CHAP. LXXIV.


1. _These are_ the leaders of the chiefs of the thousands, _those_ which
_preside_ over all creation, and over all the stars; with the four
_days_ which are added and never separated from the place allotted them,
according to the complete computation of the year.

2. And these serve four days, which are not computed in the computation
of the year.

3. Respecting them, men greatly err, for these luminaries truly serve,
in the mansion of the world, one _day_ in the first gate, one in the
third gate, one in the fourth, and one in the sixth gate.

4. And the harmony of the world becomes complete every three hundred and
sixty-fourth state of it. For the signs,

5. The seasons,

6. The years,

7. And the days, Uriel showed me; the angel whom the Lord of glory
appointed over all the luminaries.

8. Of heaven in heaven, and in the world; that they might rule in the
face of the sky, and appearing over the earth, become

9. Conductors of the days and nights: the sun, the moon, the stars, and
all the ministers of heaven, which make their circuit with all the
chariots of heaven.

10. Thus Uriel showed me twelve gates open for the circuit of the
chariots of the sun in heaven, from which the rays of the sun shoot
forth.

11. From these proceed heat over the earth, when they are opened in
their stated seasons. They are for the winds, and the spirit of the dew,
when in their seasons they are opened; opened in heaven at _its_
extremities.

12. Twelve gates I beheld in heaven, at the extremities of the earth,
through which the sun, moon, and stars, and all the works of heaven,
proceed at their rising and setting.

13. Many windows also are open on the right and on the left.

14. One window at a _certain_ season grows extremely hot. So also are
there gates from which the stars go forth as they are commanded, and in
which they set according to their number.

15. I saw likewise the chariots of heaven, running in the world above to
those gates in which the stars turn, which never set. One of these is
greater than all, which goes round the whole world.




                      CHAP. LXXV. [SECT. XV.[180]]


1. And at the extremities of the earth I beheld twelve gates open for
all the winds, from which they proceed and blow over the earth.

2. Three of them are open in the front of heaven, three in the west,
three on the right side of heaven, and three on the left. The first
three are those which are towards the east, three are towards the north,
three behind those which are upon the left, towards the south, and three
on the west.

3. From four of them proceed winds of blessing, and of health; and from
eight proceed winds of punishment; when they are sent to destroy the
earth, and the heaven above it, all its inhabitants, and all which are
in the waters, or on dry land.

4. The first of these winds proceeds from the gate termed the eastern,
through the first gate on the east, which inclines southwards. From this
goes forth destruction, drought, heat, and perdition.

5. From the second gate, the middle one, proceeds equity. There issue
from it rain, fruitfulness, health, and dew; and from the third gate
northwards, proceed cold and drought.

6. After these proceed the south winds through three principal gates;
through their first gate, which inclines eastwards, proceeds a hot wind.

7. But from the middle gate proceed grateful odour, dew, rain, health,
and life.

8. From the third gate, which is westwards, proceed dew, rain, blight,
and destruction.

9. After these are the winds to the north, which is called the sea.
_They proceed_ from three gates. The first[181] gate _is that_ which is
on the east, inclining southwards; from this proceed dew, rain, blight,
and destruction. From the middle direct gate proceed rain, dew, life,
and health. And from the third gate, which is westwards, inclining
towards the south,[182] proceed mist, frost, snow, rain, dew, and
blight.

10. After these _in the_ fourth _quarter_ are the winds to the west.
From the first gate, inclining northwards, proceed dew, rain, frost,
cold, snow, and chill; from the middle gate proceed rain, health, and
blessing;

11. And from the last gate, which is southwards, proceed drought,
destruction, scorching, and perdition.

12. The _account of the_ twelve gates of the four quarters of heaven is
ended.

13. All their laws, all their _infliction_ of punishment, and the health
_produced_ by them, have I explained to thee, my son Mathusala.

Footnote 180:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 181:

  _seventh._ Perhaps the seventh which had been enumerated.

Footnote 182:

  _the north._ An error in both MSS.




                              CHAP. LXXVI.


1. The first wind is called the eastern, because it is the first.

2. The second is called the south, because the Most High there descends,
and frequently there descends _he who_ is blessed for ever.

3. The western wind has the name of diminution, because there all the
luminaries of heaven are diminished, and descend.

4. The fourth wind, which is named the north, is divided into three
parts; one of which is for the habitation of man; another for seas of
water, with valleys, woods, rivers, shady places, and snow; and the
third part _contains_ paradise.

5. Seven high mountains I beheld, higher than all the mountains of the
earth, from which frost proceeds; while days, seasons, and years depart
and pass away.

6. Seven rivers I beheld upon earth, greater than all rivers, one of
which takes its course from the west; into a great sea its water flows.

7. Two come from the north to the sea, their waters flowing into the
Erythræan sea, on the east. And with respect to the remaining four, they
take their course in the cavity of the north, _two_ to their sea, the
Erythræan sea, and two are poured into a great sea, where also it is
said _there is_ a desert.

8. Seven great islands I saw in the sea and on the earth. Seven in the
great sea.




                             CHAP. LXXVII.


1. The names of the sun are these: one Aryares, the other Tomas.

2. The moon has four names. The first is Asonya; the second, Ebla; the
third, Benase; and the fourth, Erae.

3. These are the two great luminaries, whose orbs are as the orbs of
heaven; and the dimensions of both are equal.

4. In the orb of the sun _there is_ a seventh portion of light, which is
added to it from the moon. By measure it is put in, until a seventh
portion of _the light of_ the sun is departed. They set, enter into the
western gate, circuit by the north, and through the eastern gate go
forth over the face of heaven.

5. When the moon rises, it appears in heaven; and the half of a seventh
portion of light is all _which is_ in it.

6. In fourteen _days_ the whole of its light is completed.

7. _By_ three quintuples light is put into it, until _in_ fifteen _days_
its light is completed, according to the signs of the year; it has three
quintuples.

8. The moon has the half of a seventh portion.

9. During its diminution on the first day its light decreases a
fourteenth part; on the second day it decreases a thirteenth part; on
the third day a twelfth part; on the fourth day an eleventh part; on the
fifth day a tenth part; on the sixth day a ninth part; on the seventh
day it decreases an eighth part; on the eighth day it decreases a
seventh part; on the ninth day it decreases a sixth part; on the tenth
day it decreases a fifth part; on the eleventh day it decreases a fourth
part; on the twelfth day it decreases a third part; on the thirteenth
day it decreases a second part; on the fourteenth day it decreases a
half of its seventh part; and on the fifteenth day the whole remainder
of its light is consumed.

10. On stated months the moon has twenty-nine days.

11. It also has a period of twenty-eight days.

12. Uriel likewise showed me another regulation, when light is poured
into the moon, how it is poured into it from the sun.

13. All the time that the moon is in progress with its light, it is
poured _into it_ in the presence of the sun, until _its_ light is in
fourteen days completed in heaven.

14. And when it is wholly extinguished, its light is consumed in heaven;
and on the first day it is called the new moon, for on that day light is
received into it.

15. It becomes precisely completed on the day that the sun descends into
the west, while the moon ascends at night from the east.

16. The moon then shines all the night, until the sun rises before it;
when the moon disappears in turn before the sun.

17. Where light comes to the moon, there again it decreases, until all
its light is extinguished, and the days of the moon pass away.

18. Then its orb remains solitary without light.

19. During three months it effects in thirty days _each month_ its
period; and during three _more_ months it effects it in twenty-nine days
each. _These are the times_ in which it effects its decrease in its
first period, and in the first gate, _namely_, in one hundred and
seventy-seven days.

20. And at the time of its going forth during three months it appears
thirty days each, and during three _more_ months it appears twenty-nine
days each.

21. In the night it appears for each twenty _days_ as _the face of_ a
man, and in the day as heaven; for it is nothing else except its light.




                             CHAP. LXXVIII.


1. And now, my son Mathusala, I have shown thee everything; and _the
account of_ every ordinance of the stars of heaven is finished.

2. He showed me every ordinance respecting these, which _takes place_ at
all times and in all seasons under every influence, in all years, at the
arrival and under the rule of each, during every month and every week.
_He showed me_ also the decrease of the moon, which is effected in the
sixth gate; for in that sixth gate is its light consumed.

3. From this is the beginning of the month; and its decrease is effected
in the sixth gate in its period, until a hundred and seventy-seven days
are completed; according to the mode of computation by weeks,[183]
twenty-five _weeks_ and two days.

4. _Its period_ is less than that of the sun, according to the ordinance
of the stars, by five days in one half year[184] precisely.

5. When that _their_ visible situation is completed. Such is the
appearance and likeness of every luminary, which Uriel, the great angel
who conducts them, showed to me.

Footnote 183:

  _according to the ordinance of the week._

Footnote 184:

  _in one time._




                              CHAP. LXXIX.


1. In those days Uriel answered and said to me, Behold, I have showed
thee all things, O Enoch;

2. And all things have I revealed to thee. Thou seest the sun, the moon,
and those which conduct the stars of heaven, which cause all their
operations, seasons, and arrivals to return.

3. In the days of sinners the years shall be shortened.

4. Their seed shall be backward in their prolific soil; and everything
done on earth shall be subverted, and disappear in its season. The rain
shall be restrained, and heaven shall stand still.

5. In those days the fruits of the earth shall be late, and not flourish
in their season; and in their season the fruits of the trees shall be
withholden.

6. The moon shall change its laws, and not be seen at its proper period.
But in those days shall heaven be seen; and barrenness shall take place
in the borders of the great chariots in the west. _Heaven_ shall shine
more than _when illuminated by_ the orders of light; while many chiefs
among the stars of authority shall err, perverting their ways and works.

7. Those shall not appear in their season, who command them, and all the
classes of the stars shall be shut up against sinners.

8. The thoughts of those who dwell on earth shall transgress within
them; and they shall be perverted in all their ways.

9. They shall transgress, and think themselves gods; while evil shall be
multiplied among them.

10. And punishment shall come upon them, so that all of them shall be
destroyed.




                              CHAP. LXXX.


1. He said, O Enoch, look on the book which heaven has gradually dropped
down;[185] and, reading that which is written in it, understand every
part of it.

2. Then I looked on all which was written, and understood all, reading
the book and everything written in it, all the works of man;

3. And of all the children of flesh upon earth, during the generations
of the world.

4. Immediately after I blessed the Lord, the King of glory, who has thus
for ever formed the whole workmanship of the world.

5. And I glorified the Lord, on account of his long-suffering and
blessing towards the children of the world.

6. At that time I said, Blessed is the man, who shall die righteous and
good, against whom no catalogue of crime has been written, and with whom
iniquity is not found.

7. Then those three holy ones caused me to approach, and placed me on
the earth, before the door of my house.

8. And they said unto me, Explain everything to Mathusala thy son; and
inform all thy children, that no flesh shall be justified before the
Lord; for he is their Creator.

9. During one year we will leave thee with thy children, until thou
shalt again recover thy strength, that thou mayest instruct thy family,
write these things, and explain them to all thy children. But in another
year they shall take thee from the midst of them, and thy heart shall be
strengthened; for the elect shall point out righteousness to the elect;
the righteous with the righteous shall rejoice, congratulating each
other; but sinners with sinners shall die,

10. And the perverted with the perverted shall be drowned.

11. Those likewise who act righteously shall die on account of the works
of man, and shall be gathered together on account of the works of the
wicked.

12. In those days they finished conversing with me.

13. And I returned to my fellow men, blessing the Lord of worlds.

Footnote 185:

  _has distilled._




                              CHAP. LXXXI.


1. Now, my son Mathusala, all these things I speak unto thee, and write
for thee. To thee I have revealed all, and have given thee books of
everything.

2. Preserve, my son Mathusala, the books written by thy father;[186]
that thou mayest transmit them to future generations.

3. Wisdom have I given to thee, to thy children, and thy posterity, that
they may transmit to their children, for generations for ever, this
wisdom in their thoughts; and that those who comprehend _it_ may not
slumber, but hear with their ears; that they may learn this wisdom, and
be deemed worthy of eating _this_ wholesome food.

4. Blessed are all the righteous; blessed all who walk in _the paths of_
righteousness; in whom no crime _is found_, as in sinners, when all
their days are numbered.

5. With respect to the progress of the sun in heaven, it enters and goes
out of _each_ gate for thirty days, with the leaders of the thousand
classes of the stars; with four which are added, and appertain to the
four quarters of the year, which conduct them, and accompany them at
four periods.

6. Respecting these, men greatly err, and do not compute them in the
computation of every age; for they greatly err respecting them; nor do
men know accurately that they are in the computation of the year. But
indeed these are marked down[187] for ever; one in the first gate, one
in the third, one in the fourth, and one in the sixth:

7. So that the year is completed in three hundred and sixty-four days.

8. Truly has been stated,[188] and accurately has been computed that
which is marked down; for the luminaries, the months, the fixed periods,
the years, and the days, Uriel has explained to me, and communicated to
me;[189] whom the Lord of all creation, on my account, commanded
(according to the might of heaven, and the power which it possesses both
by night and by day) to explain _the laws of_ light to man, of the sun,
moon, and stars, and of all the powers of heaven, which are turned with
their respective orbs.

9. This is the ordinance of the stars, which set in their places, in
their seasons, in their periods, in their days, and in their months.

10. These are the names of those who conduct them, who watch and enter
in their seasons, according to their ordinance in their periods, in
their months, in _the times of_ their influence, and in their stations.

11. Four conductors of them first enter, who separate the four quarters
of the year. After these, twelve conductors of their classes, who
separate the months and the year _into_ three hundred and sixty-four
_days_, with the leaders of a thousand, who distinguish between the
days, as well as between the four additional ones; which, _as_
conductors, divide the four quarters of the year.

12. These leaders of a thousand are in the midst of the conductors, and
the conductors are added each behind his station, and their conductors
make the separation. These are the names of the conductors, who separate
the four quarters of the year, who are appointed _over them_: Melkel,
Helammelak,

13. Meliyal, and Narel.

14. And the names of those who conduct them are Adnarel, Jyasusal, and
Jyelumeal.

15. These are the three who follow after the conductors of the classes
_of stars_; each following after the three conductors of the classes,
which themselves follow after those conductors of the stations, who
divide the four quarters of the year.

16. In the first part of the year rises and rules Melkyas, who is named
Tamani, and Zahay.[190]

17. All the days of his influence, _during_ which he rules, are
ninety-one days.

18. And these are the signs of the days which are seen upon earth. In
the days of his influence _there is_ perspiration, heat, and trouble.
All the trees become fruitful; the leaf of every tree comes forth; the
corn is reaped; the rose and every species of flowers blossoms in the
field; and the trees of winter are dried up.

19. These are the names of the conductors who are under them: Barkel,
Zelsabel; and another additional conductor of a thousand is named
Heloyalef, the days of whose influence have been completed. The other
conductor next after them _is_ Helemmelek, whose name they call the
splendid Zahay.

20. All the days of his light are ninety-one days.

21. These are the signs of the days upon earth, heat and drought; while
the trees bring forth their fruits, warmed and concocted, and give their
fruits to dry.

22. The flocks follow and yean. All the fruits of the earth are
collected, with everything in the fields, and the vines are trodden.
This takes place during the time of his influence.

23. These are their names and orders, and _the names_ of the conductors
who are under them, of those who are chiefs of a thousand: Gedaeyal,
Keel, Heel.

24. And the name of the additional leader of a thousand is Asphael.

25. The days of his influence have been completed.

Footnote 186:

  _the books of the hand of thy father._

Footnote 187:

  _to impress_, _express_, or _to seal_.

Footnote 188:

  _have they related._

Footnote 189:

  _has breathed into me._

Footnote 190:

  _the sun._




                    CHAP. LXXXII. [SECT. XVI.[191]]


1. And now I have shown thee, my son Mathusala, every sight which I saw
prior to thy birth.[192] I will relate another vision, which I saw
before I was married; they resemble each other.

2. The first was when I was learning a book; and the other before I was
married to thy mother. I saw a potent vision;

3. And on account of these things besought the Lord.

4. I was lying down in the house of my grandfather Malalel, _when_ I saw
in a vision heaven purifying, and snatched away.

5. And falling to the earth, I saw likewise the earth absorbed by a
great abyss; and mountains suspended over mountains.

6. Hills were sinking upon hills, lofty trees were gliding[193] off from
their trunks, and were in the act of being projected, and of sinking
into the abyss.

7. _Being alarmed_ at these things, my voice faltered.[194] I cried out
and said, The earth is destroyed. Then my grandfather Malalel raised me
up, and said to me: Why dost thou thus cry out, my son? and wherefore
dost thou thus lament?

8. I related to him the whole vision which I had seen. He said to me,
Confirmed is that which thou hast seen, my son;

9. And potent the vision of thy dream respecting every secret sin of the
earth. Its substance shall sink into the abyss, and a great destruction
take place.

10. Now, my son, rise up; and beseech the Lord of glory (for thou art
faithful), that a remnant may be left upon earth, and that he would not
wholly destroy it. My son, all this _calamity_ upon earth comes down
from heaven;[195] upon earth shall there be a great destruction.

11. Then I arose, prayed, and entreated; and wrote down my prayer for
the generations of the world, explaining everything to my son Mathusala.

12. When I went out below, and looking up to heaven, beheld the sun
proceeding from the east, the moon descending to the west, a few
_scattered_ stars, and everything which God[196] has known from the
beginning, I blessed the Lord of judgment, and magnified him: because he
hath sent forth the sun from the chambers[197] of the east; that,
ascending and rising in the face of heaven, it might spring up, and
pursue the path which has been pointed out to it.

Footnote 191:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 192:

  _before thee._

Footnote 193:

  _cutting._

Footnote 194:

  _the word fell down in my mouth._

Footnote 195:

  _all this upon earth is from heaven._

Footnote 196:

  _he._

Footnote 197:

  _windows._




                             CHAP. LXXXIII.


1. I lifted up my bands in righteousness, and blessed the holy, and the
Great One. I spoke with the breath of my mouth, and with a tongue of
flesh, which God has formed for all the sons of mortal men, that with it
they may speak; giving them breath, a mouth, and a tongue to converse
with.

2. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King, great and powerful in thy
greatness, Lord of all the creatures of heaven, King of kings, God of
the whole world, whose reign, whose kingdom, and whose majesty endure
for ever and ever.

3. From generation to generation shall thy dominion _exist_. All the
heavens are thy throne for ever, and all the earth thy footstool for
ever and for ever.

4. For thou hast made _them_, and over all thou reignest. No act
whatsoever exceeds thy power. With thee wisdom is unchangeable; nor from
thy throne and from thy presence is it ever averted. Thou knowest all
things, seest and hearest them; nor is anything concealed from thee; for
thou perceivest all things.

5. The angels of thy heavens have transgressed; and on mortal flesh
shall thy wrath remain,[198] until the day of the great judgment.

6. Now then, O God, Lord and mighty King, I entreat thee, and beseech
thee to grant my prayer, that a posterity may be left to me on earth,
and that the whole human race may not perish;

7. That the earth may not be left destitute, and destruction take place
for ever.

8. O my Lord, let the race perish from off the earth which has offended
thee, but a righteous and upright race establish for a posterity[199]
for ever. Hide not thy face, O Lord, from the prayer of thy servant.

Footnote 198:

  _be._

Footnote 199:

  _the plant of a seed._




                    CHAP. LXXXIV. [SECT. XVII.[200]]


1. After this I saw another dream, and explained it all to thee, my son.
Enoch arose and said to his son Mathusala, To thee, my son, will I
speak. Hear my word; and incline thine ear to the visionary dream of thy
father. Before I married thy mother Edna, I saw a vision on my bed;

2. And behold, a cow sprung forth from the earth;

3. And this cow was white.

4. Afterwards a female heifer sprung forth; and with it another
heifer:[201] one of them was black, and one was red.[202]

5. The black heifer then struck the red one, and pursued it over the
earth.

6. From that period I could see nothing more of the red heifer; but the
black one increased in bulk, and a female heifer came with him.

7. After this I saw that many cows proceeded forth, resembling him, and
following after him.

8. The first female young one also went out in the presence of the first
cow; and sought the red heifer; but found him not.

9. And she lamented with a great lamentation, while she was seeking him.

10. Then I looked until that first _cow_ came to her, from which time
she became silent, and ceased to lament.

11. Afterwards she calved another white cow.

12. And again calved many cows and black heifers.

13. In my sleep also I perceived a white bull, which in like manner
grew, and became a large white bull.

14. After him many white cows came forth, resembling him.

15. And they began to calve many _other_ white cows, which resembled
them and followed each other.

Footnote 200:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 201:

  The sense seems to require that the passage should be, “_two other
  heifers_.”

Footnote 202:

  Cain and Abel.




                              CHAP. LXXXV.


1. Again I looked attentively,[203] while sleeping, and surveyed heaven
above.

2. And behold a single star fell from heaven.

3. Which being raised up, ate and fed among those cows.

4. After that I perceived _other_ large and black cows; and behold all
of them changed their stalls and pastures, while their young began to
lament one with another. Again I looked in _my_ vision, and surveyed
heaven; when behold I saw many stars which descended, and projected
themselves from heaven to where the first star was,

5. Into the midst of those young ones; while the cows were with them,
feeding in the midst of them.

6. I looked at and observed them; when behold, they all acted after the
manner of horses, and began to approach the young cows, all of whom
became pregnant, and brought forth elephants, camels, and asses.

7. At these all the cows were alarmed and terrified; when they began
biting with their teeth, swallowing, and striking with their horns.

8. They began also to devour the cows; and behold all the children of
the earth trembled, shook with terror at them, and suddenly fled away.

Footnote 203:

  _with my eyes._




                             CHAP. LXXXVI.


1. Again I perceived them, when they began to strike and to swallow each
other; and the earth cried out. Then I raised my eyes a second time
towards heaven, and saw in a vision, that, behold, there came forth from
heaven as it were the likeness of white men. One came forth from thence,
and three with him.

2. Those three, who came forth last, seized me by my hand; and raising
me up from the generations of the earth, elevated me to a high station.

3. Then they showed me a lofty tower on the earth, while every hill
became diminished. And they said, Remain here, until thou perceivest
what shall come upon those elephants, camels, and asses, upon the stars,
and upon all the cows.




                             CHAP. LXXXVII.


1. Then I looked at that one of the four _white men_, who came forth
first.

2. He seized the first star which fell down from heaven.

3. And, binding it hand and foot, he cast it into a valley; a valley
narrow, deep, stupendous, and gloomy.

4. Then one of them drew his sword, and gave it to the elephants,
camels, and asses, who began to strike each other. And the whole earth
shook on account of them.

5. And when I looked in the vision, behold, one of those four angels,
who came forth, hurled from heaven, collected together, and took all the
great stars, whose form partly resembled that of horses; and binding
them all hand and foot, cast them into the cavities of the earth.




                            CHAP. LXXXVIII.


1. Then one of those four went to the white cows, and taught them a
mystery. While the cow was trembling, it was born, and became a
man,[204] and fabricated for himself a large ship. In this he dwelt, and
three cows[205] dwelt with him in that ship, which covered them.

2. Again I lifted up my eyes towards heaven, and saw a lofty roof. Above
it were seven cataracts, which poured forth on a certain village much
water.

3. Again I looked, and behold there were fountains open on the earth in
that large village.

4. The water began to boil up, and rose over the earth; so that the
village was not seen, while its whole soil was covered with water.

5. Much water was over it, darkness, and clouds. Then I surveyed the
height of this water; and it was elevated above the village.

6. It flowed over the village, and stood higher than the earth.

7. Then all the cows which were collected there, while I looked on them,
were drowned, swallowed up, and destroyed in the water.

8. But the ship floated above it. All the cows, the elephants, the
camels, and the asses, were drowned on the earth, and all cattle. Nor
could I perceive them. Neither were they able to get out, but perished,
and sunk into the deep.

9. Again I looked in the vision until those cataracts from that lofty
roof were removed, and the fountains of the earth became equalized,
while other depths were opened;

10. Into which the water began to descend, until the dry ground
appeared.

11. The ship remained on the earth; the darkness receded; and it became
light.

12. Then the white cow, which became a man, went out of the ship, and
the three cows with him.

13. One of the three cows was white, resembling that cow; one of them
was red as blood; and one of them was black. And the white cow left
them.

14. Then began wild beasts and birds to bring forth.

15. Of all these the different kinds assembled together, lions, tigers,
wolves, dogs, wild boars, foxes, rabbits, and the hanzar,

16. The siset, the avest, kites, the phonkas, and ravens.

17. Then a white cow[206] was born in the midst of them.

18. And they began to bite each other; when the white cow, which was
born in the midst of them, brought forth a wild ass and a white cow at
the same time, and _after that_ many wild asses. Then the white
cow,[207] which was born, brought forth a black wild sow and a white
sheep.[208]

19. That wild sow also brought forth many swine;

20. And that sheep brought forth twelve sheep.[209]

21. When those twelve sheep grew up, they delivered one of them[210] to
the asses.[211]

22. Again those asses delivered that sheep to the wolves;[212]

23. And he grew up in the midst of them.

24. Then the Lord brought the eleven _other_ sheep, that they might
dwell and feed with him in the midst of the wolves.

25. They multiplied, and there was abundance of pasture for them.

26. But the wolves began to frighten and oppress them, while they
destroyed their young ones.

27. And they left their young in torrents of deep water.

28. Now the sheep began to cry out on account of their young, and fled
for refuge to their Lord. One[213] however, which was saved, escaped,
and went away to the wild asses.

29. I beheld the sheep moaning, crying, and petitioning their Lord,

30. With all their might, until the Lord of the sheep descended at their
voice from _his_ lofty habitation; went to them; and inspected them.

31. He called to that sheep which had secretly stolen away from the
wolves, and told him to make the wolves understand that they were not to
touch the sheep.

32. Then that sheep went to the wolves with the word of the Lord, when
another met him,[214] and proceeded with him.

33. Both of them together entered the dwelling of the wolves; and
conversing with them made them understand, that from thenceforwards they
were not to touch the sheep.

34. Afterwards I perceived the wolves greatly prevailing over the sheep
with their whole force. The sheep cried out; and their Lord came to
them.

35. He began to strike the wolves, who commenced a grievous lamentation;
but the sheep were silent, nor from that time did they cry out.

36. I then looked at them, until they departed from the wolves. The eyes
of the wolves were blind, who went out and followed them with all their
might. But the Lord of the sheep proceeded with them, and conducted
them.

37. All his sheep followed him.

38. His countenance _was_ terrific and splendid, and glorious was his
aspect. Yet the wolves began to follow the sheep, until they overtook
them in a certain lake of water.[215]

39. Then that lake became divided; the water standing up on both sides
before their face.

40. And while their Lord was conducting them, he placed himself between
them and the wolves.

41. The wolves however perceived not the sheep, but went into the midst
of the lake, following them, and running after them into the lake of
water.

42. But when they saw the Lord of the sheep, they turned to fly from
before his face.

43. Then the water of the lake returned, and that suddenly, according to
its nature. It became full, and was raised up, until it covered the
wolves. And I saw that all of them which had followed the sheep
perished, and were drowned.

44. But the sheep passed over this water, proceeding to a wilderness,
which was without both water and grass. And they began to open their
eyes and to see.

45. Then I beheld the Lord of the sheep inspecting them, and giving them
water and grass.

46. The sheep _already mentioned_ was proceeding _with them_, and
conducting them.

47. And when he had ascended the top of a lofty rock, the Lord of the
sheep sent him to them.

48. Afterwards I perceived their Lord standing before them, with an
aspect terrific and severe.

49. And when they all beheld him, they were frightened at his
countenance.

50. All of them were alarmed, and trembled. They cried out after that
sheep; and to the other sheep who had been with him, and who was in the
midst of them, _saying_, We are not able to stand before our Lord, or to
look upon him.

51. Then that sheep who conducted them went away, and ascended the top
of the rock;

52. When the _rest of the_ sheep began to grow blind, and to wander from
the path which he had shown them; but he knew it not.

53. Their Lord however was moved with great indignation against them;
and when that sheep had learned _what had happened_,

54. He descended from the top of the rock, and coming to them, found
that there were many,

55. Which had become blind;

56. And had wandered from his path. As soon as they beheld him, they
feared, and trembled at his presence;

57. And became desirous of returning to their fold.

58. Then that sheep, taking with him other sheep, went to those which
had wandered.

59. And afterwards began to kill them. They were terrified at his
countenance. Then he caused those which had wandered to return; who went
back to their fold.

60. I likewise saw there in the vision, that this sheep became a man,
built an house for the Lord of the sheep, and made them all stand in
that house.

61. I perceived also that the sheep which proceeded to meet this sheep,
their conductor, died. I saw, too, that all the great sheep perished,
while smaller ones rose up in their place, entered into a pasture, and
approached a river of water.[216]

62. Then that sheep, their conductor, who became a man, was separated
from them, and died.

63. All the sheep sought after him, and cried for him with bitter
lamentation.

64. I saw likewise that they ceased to cry after that sheep, and passed
over the river of water.

65. And that there arose other sheep, all of whom conducted them,[217]
instead of those who were dead, and who had _previously_ conducted them.

66. Then I saw that the sheep entered into a goodly place, and a
territory delectable and glorious.

67. I saw also that they became satiated; that their house was in the
midst of a delectable territory: and that sometimes their eyes were
opened, and that sometimes they were blind; until another sheep[218]
arose and conducted them. He brought them all back; and their eyes were
opened.

68. Then dogs, foxes, and wild boars began to devour them, until _again_
another sheep[219] arose, the master of the flock, one of themselves, a
ram, to conduct them. This ram began to butt on every side those dogs,
foxes, and wild boars, until they all perished.

69. But the _former_ sheep opened his eyes, and saw the ram in the midst
of them, who had laid aside his glory.

70. And he began to strike the sheep, treading upon them, and behaving
himself without dignity.

71. Then their Lord sent the _former_ sheep _again_ to a still
different[220] sheep,[221] and raised him up to be a ram, and to conduct
them instead of that sheep who had laid aside his glory.

72. Going therefore to him, and conversing with him alone, he raised up
that ram, and made him a prince and leader of the flock. All the time
that the dogs[222] troubled the sheep,

73. The first ram paid respect to this latter ram.

74. Then the latter ram arose, and fled away from before his face. And I
saw that those dogs caused the first ram to fall.

75. But the latter ram arose, and conducted the smaller sheep.

76. That ram likewise begat many sheep, and died.

77. Then there was a smaller sheep,[223] a ram, instead of him, which
became a prince and leader, conducting the flock.

78. And the sheep increased in size, and multiplied.

79. And all the dogs, foxes, and wild boars feared, and fled away from
him.

80. That ram also struck and killed all the wild beasts, so that they
could not again prevail in the midst of the sheep, nor at any time ever
snatch them away.

81. And that house was made large and wide; a lofty tower being built
upon it by the sheep, for the Lord of the sheep.

82. The house was low, but the tower was elevated and very high.

83. Then the Lord of the sheep stood upon that tower, and caused a full
table to approach before him.

84. Again I saw that those sheep wandered, and went various ways,
forsaking that their house;

85. And that their Lord called to some among them, whom he sent[224] to
them.

86. But these the sheep began to kill. And when one of them was saved
from slaughter,[225] he leaped, and cried out against those who were
desirous of killing him.

87. But the Lord of the sheep delivered him from their hands, and made
him ascend to him, and remain with him.

88. He sent also many others to them, to testify, and with lamentations
to exclaim against them.

89. Again I saw, when some of them forsook the house of their Lord, and
his tower; wandering on all sides, and growing blind,

90. I saw that the Lord of the sheep made a great slaughter among them
in their pasture, until they cried out to him in consequence of that
slaughter. Then he departed from the place _of his habitation_, and left
them in the power of lions, tigers, wolves, and the zeebt, and in the
power of foxes, and of every beast.

91. And the wild beasts began to tear them.

92. I saw, too, that he forsook the house of their fathers, and their
tower; giving them all into the power of lions to tear and devour them;
into the power of every beast.

93. Then I began to cry out with all my might, imploring the Lord of the
sheep, and showing him how the sheep were devoured by all the beasts of
prey.

94. But he looked on in silence, rejoicing that they were devoured,
swallowed up, and carried off; and leaving them in the power of every
beast for food. He called also seventy shepherds, and resigned to them
_the care of_ the sheep, that they might overlook them;

95. Saying to them and to their associates, Every one of you
henceforwards overlook the sheep, and whatsoever I command you, do; and
I will deliver _them_ to you numbered.[226]

96. I will tell you which of them shall be slain; these destroy. And he
delivered the sheep to them.

97. Then he called to another, and said, Understand, and watch
everything which the shepherds shall do to these sheep; for many more of
them shall perish than I have commanded.

98. Of every excess and slaughter, which the shepherds shall commit,
_there shall be_ an account; as, how many may have perished by my
command, and how many they may have destroyed of their own heads.

99. Of all the destruction _brought about by_ each of the shepherds
there shall be an account; and according to the number I will cause a
recital to be made before me, how many they have destroyed of their own
heads, and how many they have delivered up to destruction, that I may
have this testimony against them; that I may know all their proceedings;
and that, delivering _the sheep_ to them, I may see what they will do;
whether they will act as I have commanded them, or not.

100. _Of this_, however, they shall be ignorant; neither shalt thou make
any explanation to them, neither shalt thou reprove them; but there
shall be an account of all the destruction _done_ by them in their
respective seasons. Then they began to kill, and destroy more than it
was commanded them.

101. And they left the sheep in the power of lions, so that very many of
them were devoured and swallowed up by lions and tigers; and wild boars
preyed upon them. That tower they burnt, and overthrew that house.

102. Then I grieved extremely on account of the tower, and because the
house of the sheep was overthrown.

103. Neither was I afterwards able to perceive whether they _again_
entered that house.

104. The shepherds likewise, and their associates, delivered them to all
the wild beasts, that they might devour them. Each of them in his
season, according to his number, was delivered up; each of them, one
with another, was described in a book, how many of them, one with
another, were destroyed, in a book.

105. More, however, than was ordered, every _shepherd_ killed and
destroyed.

106. Then I began to weep, and was greatly indignant, on account of the
sheep.

107. In like manner also I saw in the vision him who wrote, how he wrote
down one, destroyed by the shepherds, every day. He ascended, remained,
and exhibited each of his books to the Lord of the sheep, _containing_
all which they had done, and all which each of them had made away with;

108. And all which they had delivered up to destruction.

109. He took the book up in his hands, read it, sealed it, and deposited
it.

110. After this, I saw shepherds overlooking for twelve hours.

111. And behold three of the sheep[227] departed, arrived, went in; and
began building all which was fallen down of that house.

112. But the wild boars[228] hindered them, although they prevailed not.

113. Again they began to build as before, and raised up that tower,
which was called a lofty tower.

114. And again they began to place before the tower a table, with every
impure and unclean kind of bread upon it.

115. Moreover also all the sheep were blind, and could not see; as were
the shepherds likewise.

116. Thus were they delivered up to the shepherds for a great
destruction, who trod them under foot, and devoured them.

117. Yet was their Lord silent, until all the sheep in the field were
destroyed. The shepherds and the sheep were all mixed together; but they
did not save them from the power of the beasts.

118. Then he who wrote the book ascended, exhibited it, and read it at
the residence of the Lord of the sheep. He petitioned him for them, and
prayed, pointing out every act of the shepherds, and testifying before
him against them all. Then taking the book, he deposited it with him,
and departed.

Footnote 204:

  Noah.

Footnote 205:

  Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

Footnote 206:

  Abraham.

Footnote 207:

  Isaac.

Footnote 208:

  Esau and Jacob.

Footnote 209:

  The twelve Patriarchs.

Footnote 210:

  Joseph.

Footnote 211:

  The Midianites.

Footnote 212:

  The Egyptians.

Footnote 213:

  Moses.

Footnote 214:

  Aaron.

Footnote 215:

  The Red Sea.

Footnote 216:

  The river Jordan.

Footnote 217:

  The Judges of Israel.

Footnote 218:

  Samuel.

Footnote 219:

  Saul.

Footnote 220:

  _another._

Footnote 221:

  David.

Footnote 222:

  The Philistines.

Footnote 223:

  Solomon.

Footnote 224:

  The prophets.

Footnote 225:

  Elijah.

Footnote 226:

  _with number._

Footnote 227:

  Zerubbabel, Joshua, and Nehemiah.

Footnote 228:

  The Samaritans.




                             CHAP. LXXXIX.


1. And I observed during the time, that thus thirty-seven[229] shepherds
were overlooking, all of whom finished in their respective periods as
the first. Others then received them into their hands, that they might
overlook them in their respective periods, every shepherd in his own
period.

2. Afterwards I saw in the vision, that all the birds of heaven arrived;
eagles, the avest, kites and ravens. The eagle instructed them all.

3. They began to devour the sheep, to peck out their eyes, and to eat up
their bodies.

4. The sheep then cried out; for their bodies were devoured by the
birds.

5. I also cried out, and groaned in my sleep against that shepherd which
overlooked the flock.

6. And I looked, while the sheep were eaten up by the dogs, by the
eagles, and by the kites. They neither left them their body, nor their
skin, nor their muscles, until their bones alone remained; until their
bones fell upon the ground. And the sheep became diminished.

7. I observed likewise during the time, that twenty-three shepherds[230]
were overlooking; who completed in their respective periods fifty-eight
periods.

8. Then were small lambs born of those white sheep; who began to open
their eyes and to see, crying out to the sheep.

9. The sheep, however, cried not out to them, neither did they hear what
they uttered to them; but were deaf, blind, and obdurate in the greatest
degrees.

10. I saw in the vision that ravens flew down upon those lambs;

11. That they seized one of them; and that tearing the sheep in pieces,
they devoured them.

12. I saw also, that horns grew upon those lambs; and that the ravens
lighted down upon their horns.

13. I saw, too, that a large horn sprouted out on an animal[231] among
the sheep, and that their eyes were opened.

14. He looked at them. Their eyes were wide open; and he cried out to
them.

15. Then the dabela[232] saw him; all of whom ran to him.

16. And besides this, all the eagles, the avest, the ravens and the
kites, were still carrying off the sheep, flying down upon them, and
devouring them. The sheep were silent, but the dabela lamented and cried
out.

17. Then the ravens contended, and struggled with them.

18. They wished among them to break his horn; but they prevailed not
over him.

19. I looked on them, until the shepherds, the eagles, the avest, and
the kites came.

20. Who cried out to the ravens to break the horn of the dabela; to
contend with him; and to kill him. But he struggled with them, and cried
out, that help might come to him.

21. Then I perceived that the man came who had written down the names of
the shepherds, and who ascended up before the Lord of the sheep.

22. He brought assistance, and caused every one to see him descending to
the help of the dabela.

23. I perceived likewise that the Lord of the sheep came to them in
wrath, while all those who saw him fled away; all fell down in his
tabernacle before his face; while all the eagles, the avest, ravens, and
kites assembled, and brought with them all the sheep of the field.

24. All came together, and strove to break the horn of the dabela.

25. Then I saw, that the man, who wrote the book at the word of the
Lord, opened the book of destruction, of that destruction which the last
twelve shepherds[233] wrought; and pointed out before the Lord of the
sheep, that they destroyed more than those who preceded them.

26. I saw also that the Lord of the sheep came to them, and taking in
his hand the sceptre of his wrath seized the earth, which became rent
asunder; while all the beasts and birds of heaven fell from the sheep,
and sunk into the earth, which closed over them.

27. I saw, too, that a large sword was given to the sheep, who went
forth against all the beasts of the field to slay them.

28. But all the beasts and birds of heaven fled away from before their
face.

29. And I saw a throne erected in a delectable land;

30. Upon this sat the Lord of the sheep, who received all the sealed
books;

31. Which were open before him.

32. Then the Lord called the first seven white ones, and commanded them
to bring before him the first of the first stars, which preceded the
stars whose form partly resembled that of horses; the first star, which
fell down first; and they brought them all before him.

33. And he spoke to the man who wrote in his presence, who was one of
the seven white ones, saying, Take those seventy shepherds, to whom I
delivered up the sheep, and _who_ receiving them killed more of them
than I commanded. Behold, I saw them all bound, and all standing before
him. First came on the trial of the stars, which, being judged, and
found guilty, went to the place of punishment. They thrust them into _a
place_, deep, and full of flaming fire, and full of pillars of fire.
Then the seventy shepherds were judged, and being found guilty, were
thrust into the flaming abyss.

34. At that time likewise I perceived, that one abyss was thus opened in
the midst of the earth, which was full of fire.

35. And to this were brought the blind sheep; which being judged, and
found guilty, were all thrust into that abyss of fire on the earth, and
burnt.

36. The abyss was on the right of that house.

37. And I saw the sheep burning, and their bones consuming.

38. I stood beholding him immerge that ancient house, while they brought
out its pillars, every plant in it, and the ivory infolding it. They
brought it out, and deposited it in a place on the right side of the
earth.

39. I also saw, that the Lord of the sheep produced a new house, great,
and loftier than the former, which he bounded by the former circular
spot. All its pillars were new, and its ivory new, as well as more
abundant than the former ancient _ivory_, which he had brought out.

40. And while all the sheep which were left were in the midst of it, all
the beasts of the earth, and all the birds of heaven, fell down and
worshipped them, petitioning them, and obeying them in everything.

41. Then those three, who were clothed in white, and who, holding me by
my hand, had before caused me to ascend, while the hand of him _who_
spoke held me; raised me up, and placed me in the midst of the sheep,
before the judgment took place.

42. The sheep were all white, with wool long and pure. Then all who had
perished, and had been destroyed, every beast of the field, and every
bird of heaven, assembled in that house: while the Lord of the sheep
rejoiced with great joy, because all were good, and had come back again
to his dwelling.

43. And I saw that they laid down the sword which had been given to the
sheep, and returned it to his house, sealing it up in the presence of
the Lord.

44. All the sheep would have been inclosed in that house, had it been
capable of containing them;[234] and the eyes of all were open, gazing
on the good One; nor was there one among them who did not behold him.

45. I likewise perceived that the house was large, wide, and extremely
full. I saw, too, that a white cow was born, whose horns were great; and
that all the beasts of the field, and all the birds of heaven, were
alarmed at him, and entreated him at all times.

46. Then I saw that the nature of all of them was changed, and that they
became white cows;

47. And that the first, _who_ was in the midst of them, spoke,[235] when
that word became a large beast, upon the head of which were great and
black horns;

48. While the Lord of the sheep rejoiced over them, and over all the
cows.

49. I lay down in the midst of them: I awoke; and saw the whole. This is
the vision which I saw, lying down and waking. Then I blessed the Lord
of righteousness, and gave glory to Him.

50. Afterwards I wept abundantly, nor did my tears cease, so that I
became incapable of enduring it. While I was looking on, they
flowed[236] on account of what I saw; for all was come and gone by;
every individual circumstance respecting the conduct of mankind was seen
by me.

51. In that night I remembered my former dream; and therefore wept and
was troubled, because I had seen that vision.

Footnote 229:

  An apparent error for _thirty-five_. See verse 7. The kings of Judah
  and Israel.

Footnote 230:

   The kings of Babylon, etc., during and after the captivity. The
  numbers thirty-_five_ and twenty-three make fifty-eight; and not
  thirty-_seven_, as erroneously put in the first verse.

Footnote 231:

  on _one_.

Footnote 232:

  The ibex, probably symbolizing Alexander the Great.

Footnote 233:

  The native princes of Judah after its delivery from the Syrian yoke.

Footnote 234:

  _were inclosed in that house, and it did not contain them._

Footnote 235:

  _became a word._

Footnote 236:

  _descended._




                     CHAP. XC. [SECT. XVIII.[237]]


1. And now, my son Mathusala, call to me all thy brethren, and assemble
for me all the children of thy mother; for a voice calls me, and the
spirit is poured out upon me, that I may show you everything which shall
happen to you for ever.

2. Then Mathusala went, called to him all his brethren, and assembled
his kindred.

3. And conversing with all his children in truth,

4. _Enoch_ said, Hear, my children, every word of your father, and
listen in uprightness to the voice of my mouth; for I would gain your
attention, while I address you. My beloved, be attached to integrity,
and walk in it.

5. Approach not integrity with a double heart; nor be associated with
double-minded men: but walk, my children, in righteousness, which will
conduct you in good paths; and be truth your companion.

6. For I know, that oppression will exist and prevail on earth; that on
earth great punishment shall in the end take place; and that there shall
be a consummation of all iniquity, which shall be cut off from its root,
and every fabric _raised by_ it shall pass away. Iniquity, however,
shall again be renewed, and consummated on earth. Every act of crime,
and every act of oppression and impiety, shall be a second time
embraced.

7. When therefore iniquity, sin, blasphemy, tyranny, and every _evil_
work, shall increase, and _when_ transgression, impiety, and uncleanness
also shall increase, _then_ upon them all shall great punishment be
inflicted from heaven.

8. The holy Lord shall go forth in wrath, and upon them all shall great
punishment from heaven be inflicted.[238]

9. The holy Lord shall go forth in wrath, and with punishment, that he
may execute judgment upon earth.

10. In those days oppression shall be cut off from its roots, and
iniquity with fraud shall be eradicated, perishing from under heaven.

11. Every place of strength[239] shall be surrendered with its
inhabitants; with fire shall it be burnt. They shall be brought from
every part of the earth, and be cast into a judgment of fire. They shall
perish in wrath, and by a judgment overpowering them[240] for ever.

12. Righteousness shall be raised up from slumber; and wisdom shall be
raised up, and conferred upon them.

13. Then shall the roots of iniquity be cut off; sinners perish by the
sword; and blasphemers be annihilated everywhere.[241]

14. Those who meditate oppression, and those who blaspheme, by the sword
shall perish.[242]

15. And now, my children, I will describe and point out to you the path
of righteousness and the path of oppression.

16. I will again point them out to you, that you may know what is to
come.

17. Here now, my children, and walk in the path of righteousness, but
shun that of oppression; for all who walk in the path of iniquity shall
perish for ever.

Footnote 237:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 238:

  This verse is wanting in the Paris MS. as transcribed by Woide. It
  seems in the Bodleian MS. to be a mere lapse of the transcriber, who
  wrote the same words twice over.

Footnote 239:

  _tower_, _palace_, or _temple_.

Footnote 240:

  _powerful judgment._

Footnote 241:

  _cut off._

Footnote 242:

  Between the 14th and 15th verses of this chapter six others are
  inserted both in the Bodleian and Paris MSS., which I have transposed
  so as to constitute the 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, and 18th verses
  of the ninety-second chapter. This transposition seemed absolutely
  necessary to make sense of that chapter; in which, after the
  enumeration of seven weeks, or periods, the account of the eighth,
  ninth, and tenth weeks, contained in the verses transposed, seemed
  necessary to complete the narrative. Here they are clearly unconnected
  and misplaced.




                      CHAP. XCI. [SECT. XIX.[243]]


1. That which was written by Enoch. He wrote all this instruction of
wisdom for every man of dignity, and every judge of the earth; for all
my children who shall dwell upon earth, and for subsequent generations,
conducting themselves uprightly and peaceably.

2. Let not your spirit be grieved on account of the times; for the holy,
the Great One, has prescribed a period[244] to all.

3. Let the righteous man arise from slumber; let him arise, and proceed
in the path of righteousness, in all its paths; and let him advance[245]
in goodness and in eternal clemency. Mercy shall be showed to the
righteous man; upon him shall be conferred integrity and power for ever.
In goodness and in righteousness shall he exist, and shall walk in
everlasting light; but sin shall perish in eternal darkness, nor be seen
from this time forward for evermore.

Footnote 243:

  Paris MS.

Footnote 244:

  _has given days._

Footnote 245:

  _his goings_ be.




                              CHAP. XCII.


1. After this, Enoch began to speak from a book.

2. And Enoch said, Concerning the children of righteousness, concerning
the elect of the world, and concerning the plant of righteousness and
integrity.

3. _Concerning_ these things will I speak, and _these things_ will I
explain to you, my children: I _who_ am Enoch. In consequence of that
which has been shown to me, from my heavenly vision and from the voice
of the holy angels have I acquired knowledge; and from the tablet of
heaven have I acquired understanding.

4. Enoch then began to speak from a book, and said, I have been born the
seventh in the first week, while judgment and righteousness wait with
patience.

5. But after me, in the second week, great wickedness shall arise, and
fraud shall spring forth.

6. In that week[246] the end of the first shall take place, in which
mankind shall be safe.

7. But when _the first_ is completed,[247] iniquity shall grow up; and
he shall execute the decree upon sinners.[248]

8. Afterwards, in the third week, during its completion, a man[249] of
the plant of righteous judgment shall be selected; and after him the
plant of righteousness shall come for ever.

9. Subsequently, in the fourth week, during its completion, the visions
of the holy and the righteous shall be seen, the order of generation
after generation _shall take place_, and an habitation shall be made for
them.[250] Then in the fifth week, during its completion, the house of
glory and of dominion[251] shall be erected for ever.

10. After that, in the sixth week, all those who are in it shall be
darkened, the hearts of all of them shall be forgetful of wisdom, and in
it shall a man[252] ascend.

11. And during its completion he shall burn the house of dominion with
fire, and all the race of the elect root shall be dispersed.[253]

12. Afterwards, in the seventh week, a perverse generation shall arise;
abundant shall be its deeds, and all its deeds perverse. During its
completion, the righteous shall be selected from the everlasting plant
of righteousness; and to them shall be given the sevenfold doctrine of
his whole creation.

13. Afterwards there shall be another week, the eighth of righteousness,
to which shall be given a sword to execute judgment and justice upon all
oppressors.

14. Sinners shall be delivered up into the hands of the righteous, who
during its completion shall acquire habitations by their righteousness;
and the house of the great King shall be established for celebrations
for ever. After this, in the ninth week, shall the judgment of
righteousness be revealed to the whole world.

15. Every work of the ungodly shall disappear from the whole earth; the
world shall be marked for destruction; and all men shall be on the look
out for the path of integrity.

16. And after this, on the seventh day of the tenth week, there shall be
an everlasting judgment, which shall be executed upon the Watchers; and
a spacious eternal heaven shall spring forth in the midst of the angels.

17. The former heaven shall depart and pass away; a new heaven shall
appear; and all the celestial powers shine with sevenfold splendour for
ever. Afterwards likewise shall there be many weeks, which shall
externally exist in goodness and in righteousness.

18. Neither shall sin be named there for ever and for ever.[254]

19. Who is there of all the children of men, capable of hearing the
voice of the Holy One without emotion?

20. Who is there capable of thinking his thoughts? Who capable of
contemplating all the workmanship of heaven? Who of comprehending the
deeds of heaven?

21. He may behold its animation, but not its spirit. He may be capable
of conversing _respecting it_, but not of ascending _to it_. He may see
all the boundaries of these things, and meditate upon them; but he can
make nothing like them.

22. Who of all men is able to understand the breadth and length of the
earth?

23. By whom have been seen the dimensions of all these things? Is it
every man who is capable of comprehending the extent of heaven; what its
elevation is, and by what it is supported?

24. How many are the numbers of the stars; and where all the luminaries
remain at rest?

Footnote 246:

  _in it._

Footnote 247:

  _after it has been completed._

Footnote 248:

  The deluge.

Footnote 249:

  Abraham.

Footnote 250:

  The Law.

Footnote 251:

  Temple of Solomon.

Footnote 252:

  Nebuchadnezzar.

Footnote 253:

  Babylonian captivity.

Footnote 254:

  The preceding six verses, viz. 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, and 18th,
  are taken from between the 14th and 15th verses of the nineteenth
  chapter, where they are to be found in the MSS. But the sense in this
  place seemed so manifestly to require them here, that I have ventured
  to transpose them.




                              CHAP. XCIII.


1. And now let me exhort you, my children, to love righteousness, and to
walk in it; for the paths of righteousness are worthy of acceptation;
but the paths of iniquity shall suddenly fail, and be diminished.

2. To men of note in their generation the paths of oppression and death
are revealed; but they keep far from them, and do not follow them.

3. Now, too, let me exhort you _who are_ righteous, not to walk in the
paths of evil and oppression, nor in the paths of death. Approach them
not, that you may not perish; but covet,

4. And choose for yourselves righteousness, and a good life.

5. Walk in the paths of peace, that you may live, and be found worthy.
Retain my words in your inmost thoughts, and obliterate them not from
your hearts; for I know that sinners counsel men to commit crime
craftily. They are not found in every place, nor does every counsel
possess a little of them.

6. Woe to those who build up iniquity and oppression, and who lay the
foundation of fraud; for suddenly shall they be subverted, and never
obtain peace.

7. Woe to those who build up their houses with crime; for from their
very foundations shall their houses[255] be demolished, and by the sword
shall they _themselves_ fall. Those, too, who acquire gold and silver,
shall justly and suddenly perish. Woe to you who are rich, for in your
riches have you trusted; but from your riches you shall be removed;
because you have not remembered the Most High in the days of your
prosperity: [you shall be removed, because you have not remembered the
Most High in the days of your prosperity.[256]]

8. You have committed blasphemy and iniquity; and are destined to the
day of the effusion of blood, to the day of darkness, and to the day of
the great judgment.

9. This I declare and point out to you, that he who created you will
destroy you.

10. When you fall, he will not show you mercy; but your Creator will
rejoice in your destruction.

11. Let those, then, who shall be righteous among you in those days,
detest sinners, and the ungodly.

Footnote 255:

  _they._

Footnote 256:

  These lines are evidently a repetition of the preceding, from an error
  in the transcription. They do not occur in the Paris MS.




                              CHAP. XCIV.


1. O that my eyes were clouds of water, that I might weep over you, and
pour forth my tears like rain,[257] and rest from the sorrow of my
heart!

2. Who has permitted you to hate and to transgress? Judgment shall
overtake you, ye sinners.

3. The righteous shall not fear the wicked; because God will again bring
them into your power, that you may avenge yourselves of them according
to your pleasure.

4. Woe to you who shall be so bound by execrations, that you cannot be
released from them; the remedy being far removed from you on account of
your sins. Woe to you who recompense your neighbour with evil; for you
shall be recompensed according to your works.

5. Woe to you, ye false witnesses, you who aggravate iniquity; for you
shall suddenly perish.

6. Woe to you, ye sinners; for you reject the righteous; for you receive
or reject _at pleasure_ those who _commit_ iniquity; and their yoke
shall prevail over you.

Footnote 257:

  _a cloud of water._




                               CHAP. XCV.


1. Wait in hope, ye righteous; for suddenly shall sinners perish from
before you, and you shall exercise dominion over them, according to your
will.

2. In the day of the sufferings of sinners your offspring shall be
elevated, and lifted up like eagles. Your nest shall be more exalted
than that of the avest; you shall ascend, and enter into the cavities of
the earth, and into the clefts of the rocks for ever, like conies, from
the sight of the ungodly;

3. Who shall groan over you, and weep like sirens.

4. You shall not fear those who trouble you; for restoration shall be
yours; a splendid light shall shine around you, and the voice of
tranquillity shall be heard from heaven. Woe to you, sinners; for your
wealth makes you resemble saints, but your hearts reproach you,
_knowing_ that you are sinners. This word shall testify against you, for
the remembrance of crime.

5. Woe to you who feed upon the glory of the corn, and drink the
strength of the deepest spring,[258] and in _the pride of_ your power
tread down the humble.

6. Woe to you who drink water at pleasure;[259] for suddenly shall you
be recompensed, consumed, and withered, because you have forsaken the
fountain of life.

7. Woe to you who act iniquitously, fraudulently, and blasphemously;
there shall be a remembrance against you for evil.

8. Woe to you, ye powerful, who with power strike down righteousness;
for the day of your destruction shall come; _while_ at that very time
many and good days shall be the portion of the righteous,[260] _even_ at
the period of your judgment.

Footnote 258:

  _of the root of the spring._

Footnote 259:

  _at all times._

Footnote 260:

  _shall come to the righteous._




                              CHAP. XCVI.


1. The righteous are confident that sinners will be disgraced, and
perish in the day of iniquity.

2. You shall yourselves be conscious of it; for the Most High will
remember your destruction, and the angels shall rejoice over it. What
will you do ye sinners, and where will you fly in the day of judgment,
when you shall hear the words of the prayer of the righteous?

3. You are not like them who in this respect witness against you; you
are associates of sinners.

4. In those days shall the prayers of the righteous come up before the
Lord. When the day of your judgment shall arrive; and every circumstance
of your iniquity be related before the great and the holy One;

5. Your faces shall be covered with shame; while every deed,
strengthened by crime, shall be rejected.

6. Woe unto you, sinners, who in the midst of the sea, and on dry land,
are those against whom an evil record exists. Woe to you who squander
silver and gold, not obtained in righteousness, and say, We are rich,
possess wealth, and have acquired everything which we can desire.

7. Now then will we do whatsoever we are disposed to do; for we have
amassed silver; our barns are full, and the husbandmen of our families
are like overflowing water.[261]

8. Like water shall your falsehood pass away; for your wealth will not
be permanent, but shall suddenly ascend from you, because you have
obtained it all iniquitously; to extreme malediction shall you be
delivered up.

9. And now I swear to you, ye crafty, as well as simple ones; that you,
often contemplating the earth, you _who are_ men, clothe yourselves more
elegantly[262] than married women, and both together more so than
unmarried ones, everywhere _arraying yourselves_ in majesty, in
magnificence, in authority, and in silver: but gold, purple, honour, and
wealth, like water, flow away.

10. Erudition therefore and wisdom are not theirs. Thus[263] shall they
perish, together with their riches, with all their glory, and with their
honours;

11. While with disgrace, with slaughter, and in extreme penury, shall
their spirits be thrust into a furnace of fire.

12. I have sworn to you, ye sinners, that neither mountain nor hill has
been or shall be subservient[264] to woman.

13. Neither in this way has crime been sent down to us[265] upon earth,
but men of their own heads have invented it; and greatly shall those who
give it efficiency be execrated.

14. Barrenness shall not be _previously_ inflicted on woman; but on
account of the work of her hands shall she die childless.

15. I have sworn to you, ye sinners, by the holy and the Great One, that
all your evil deeds are disclosed in the heavens; and that none of your
oppressive acts are concealed and secret.

16. Think not in your minds, neither say in your hearts, that every
crime is not manifested and seen. In heaven it is daily written down
before the Most High. Henceforwards shall it be manifested; for every
act of oppression which you commit shall be daily recorded, until the
period of your condemnation.

17. Woe to you, ye simple ones, for you shall perish in your simplicity.
To the wise you will not listen, and that which is good you shall not
obtain.[266]

18. Now therefore know that you are destined to the day of destruction;
nor hope that sinners shall live; but in process of time you shall
die;[267] for you are not marked[268] for redemption;

19. But are destined to the day of the great judgment, to the day of
distress, and the extreme ignominy of your souls.

20. Woe to you, ye obdurate in heart, who commit crime, and feed on
blood. Whence _is it that_ you feed on good things, drink, and are
satiated? Is it not because our Lord, the Most High, has abundantly
supplied every good thing upon earth? To you there shall not be peace.

21. Woe to you who love the deeds of iniquity. Why do you hope for that
which is good? Know that you shall be given up into the hands of the
righteous; who shall cut off your necks, slay you, and show you no
compassion.

22. Woe to you who rejoice in the trouble of the righteous; for a grave
shall not be dug for you.

23. Woe to you who frustrate the word of the righteous; for to you there
shall be no hope of life.

24. Woe to you who write down the word of falsehood, and the word of the
wicked; for their falsehood they record, that they may hear and not
forget folly.

25. To them there shall be no peace; but they shall surely die suddenly.

Footnote 261:

  _like much water._

Footnote 262:

  _put elegance upon you more._

Footnote 263:

  _And in it._

Footnote 264:

  _a servant._ Perhaps in furnishing them with treasures for ornaments.

Footnote 265:

  _has our crime been sent down._

Footnote 266:

  _shall not find you._

Footnote 267:

  _you shall go on, and die._

Footnote 268:

  _pointed out._




                              CHAP. XCVII.


1. Woe to them who act impiously, who laud and honour the word of
falsehood. You have been lost in perdition; and have never led a
virtuous life.

2. Woe to you who change the words of integrity. They transgress against
the everlasting decree;

3. And cause the heads of those who are not sinners to be trodden down
upon the earth.

4. In those days you, O ye righteous, shall have been deemed worthy of
having your prayers rise up in remembrance; and shall have deposited
them in testimony before the angels, that they might record the sins of
sinners in the presence of the Most High.

5. In those days the nations shall be overthrown; but the families of
the nations shall rise again in the day of perdition.

6. In those days they who become pregnant shall go forth, carry off
their children, and forsake them. Their offspring shall slip from them,
and while suckling them shall they forsake them; they shall never return
to them, and never instruct their beloved.

7. Again I swear to you, ye sinners, that crime has been prepared for
the day of blood, which never ceases.

8. They shall worship stones, and engrave golden, silver, and wooden
images. They shall worship impure spirits, demons, and every idol, in
temples; but no help shall be obtained for them.[269] Their hearts shall
become impious through their folly, and their eyes be blinded with
mental superstition.[270] In their visionary dreams shall they be
impious and superstitious,[271] lying in all their actions, and
worshipping a stone. Altogether shall they perish.

9. But in those days blessed shall they be, to whom the word of wisdom
is delivered; who point out and pursue the path of the Most High; who
walk in the way of righteousness, and who act not impiously with the
impious.

10. They shall be saved.

11. Woe to you who expand the crime of your neighbour; for in hell shall
you be slain.

12. Woe to you who lay the foundation of sin and deceit, and who are
bitter on earth; for on it shall you be consumed.

13. Woe to you who build your houses by the labour of others, every part
of which is constructed with brick,[272] and with the stone of crime; I
tell you, that you shall not obtain peace.

14. Woe to you who despise the extent of the everlasting inheritance of
your fathers, while your souls follow after idols; for to you there
shall be no tranquillity.

15. Woe to them who commit iniquity, and give aid to blasphemy, who slay
their neighbour until the day of the great judgment; for your glory
shall fall; malevolence shall He put into your hearts, and the spirit of
his wrath shall stir _you_ up, that every one of you may perish by the
sword.

16. Then shall all the righteous and the holy remember your crimes.

Footnote 269:

  _shall be found for them._

Footnote 270:

  _with the fear of their heart._

Footnote 271:

  _and fear._

Footnote 272:

  _every structure of which is brick._




                             CHAP. XCVIII.


1. In those days shall fathers be struck down with their children in the
presence of each other;[273] and brethren with their brethren shall fall
dead: until a river shall flow from their blood.

2. For a man shall not restrain his hand from his children, nor from his
children’s children; his mercy will be to kill them.[274]

3. Nor shall the sinner restrain his hand from his honoured brother.
From the dawn of day to the setting sun shall the slaughter
continue.[275] The horse shall wade up to his breast, and the chariot
shall sink to its axle,[276] in the blood of sinners.

Footnote 273:

  _in one place._

Footnote 274:

  _he has been merciful, that he may kill._

Footnote 275:

  _they shall be slain._

Footnote 276:

  _its upper part._




                              CHAP. XCIX.


1. In those days the angels shall descend into places of concealment,
and gather together in one spot all who have assisted in crime.

2. In that day shall the Most High rise up to execute the great judgment
upon all sinners, and to commit the guardianship of all the righteous
and holy to the holy angels, that they may protect them as the apple of
an eye, until every evil and every crime be annihilated.

3. Whether _or not_ the righteous sleep securely,[277] wise men shall
then truly perceive.

4. And the sons of the earth shall understand every word of that book,
knowing that their riches cannot save them in the ruin of their crimes.

5. Woe to you, ye sinners, when you shall be afflicted on account of the
righteous in the day of the great trouble; shall be burnt in the fire;
and be recompensed according to your deeds.

6. Woe to you, ye perverted in heart, who are watchful to obtain an
accurate knowledge of evil, and to discover terrors. No one shall assist
you.

7. Woe to you, ye sinners; for with the words of your mouths, and with
the work of your hands, have you acted impiously; in the flame of a
blazing fire shall you be burnt.

8. And now know ye, that the angels shall inquire into your conduct in
heaven; of the sun, the moon, and the stars, _shall they inquire_
respecting your sins; for upon earth you exercise jurisdiction over the
righteous.

9. Every cloud shall bear witness against you, the snow, the dew, and
the rain: for all of them shall be withholden from you, that they may
not descend upon you, nor become subservient to your crimes.

10. Now then bring gifts of salutation to the rain; that, not being
withholden, it may descend upon you; and to the dew, if it has received
from you gold and silver. But when the frost, snow, cold, every snowy
wind, and every suffering belonging to them, fall upon you, in those
days you will be utterly incapable of standing before them.

Footnote 277:

  _a deep sleep._




                                CHAP. C.


1. Attentively consider heaven, all ye progeny of heaven, and all ye
works of the Most High; fear him, nor conduct yourselves criminally
before him.

2. If He shut up the windows of heaven, restraining the rain and dew,
that it may not descend upon earth on your account, what will you do?

3. And if He send his wrath upon you, and upon all your deeds, you are
not they who can supplicate him; you who utter[278] against his
righteousness, language proud and powerful.[279] To you there shall be
no peace.

4. Do you not see the commanders[280] of ships, how their vessels are
tossed about by the waves, torn to pieces by the winds, and exposed to
the greatest peril?

5. That they therefore fear, because their whole property is embarked
with them on the ocean; and that they forbode evil[281] in their hearts,
because it may swallow them up, and they may perish in it?

6. Is not the whole sea, all its waters, and all its commotion, the work
of him, the Most High; of him who has sealed up all its exertions, and
girded it on every side with sand?

7. _Is it not_ at his rebuke dried up, and alarmed; while all its fish
with everything _contained_ in it die? And will not you, ye sinners, who
are on earth, fear him? Is not He the maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things which are in them?

8. And who has given erudition and wisdom to all that move _progressive_
upon the earth, and over the sea?

9. Are not the commanders of ships terrified at the ocean? And shall not
sinners be terrified at the Most High?

Footnote 278:

  _for you utter._

Footnote 279:

  _great and powerful things._

Footnote 280:

  _kings._

Footnote 281:

  _think not good._




                            CHAP. CII.[282]


1. In those days, when He shall cast the calamity of fire upon you,
whither will you fly, and where will you be safe?

2. And when He sends forth his word against you, are you not spared, and
terrified?

3. All the luminaries are agitated with great fear; and all the earth is
spared, while it trembles, and suffers anxiety.

4. All the angels fulfil the commands _received_ by them, and are
desirous of being concealed from the presence of the great Glory; while
the children of the earth are alarmed and troubled.

5. But you, ye sinners, are for ever accursed; to you there shall be no
peace.

6. Fear not, ye souls of the righteous; but wait with patient hope for
the day of your death in righteousness. Grieve not, because your souls
descend in great trouble, with groaning, lamentation, and sorrow, to the
receptacle of the dead. In your lifetime your bodies have not received a
recompense in proportion to your goodness,[283] but in the period of
your existence have sinners existed; in the period of execration and of
punishment.

7. And when you die, sinners say concerning you, “As we die, the
righteous die. What profit have they in their works? Behold, like us,
they expire in sorrow and in darkness. What advantage have they over us?
Henceforward are we equal. What will be within their grasp, and what
before their eyes[284] for ever? For behold they are dead; and never
will they again[285] perceive the light.” I say unto you, ye sinners,
You have been satiated with meat and drink, with human plunder and
rapine, with sin, with the acquisition of wealth and with the sight of
good days. Have you not marked the righteous, how their end is in peace?
for no oppression is found in them even to the day of their death. They
perish, and are as if they were not, while their souls descend in
trouble to the receptacle of the dead.

Footnote 282:

  There is no chap. ci. in the MSS.

Footnote 283:

  _your flesh has not found according to your goodness._

Footnote 284:

  _What will they obtain, and what behold._

Footnote 285:

  _henceforward for ever._




                              CHAP. CIII.


1. But now I swear to you, ye righteous, by the greatness of his
splendour and his glory; by his illustrious kingdom and by his majesty,
to you I swear, that I comprehend this mystery; that I have read the
tablet of heaven, have seen the writing of the holy Ones, and have
discovered what is written and impressed on it concerning you.

2. _I have seen_ that all goodness, joy, and glory has been prepared for
you, and been written down for the spirits of them who die eminently
righteous and good.[286] To you it shall be given in return for your
troubles; and your portion _of happiness_ shall far exceed the portion
of the living.

3. The spirits of you who die in righteousness shall exist and rejoice.
Their spirits shall exult; and their remembrance shall be before the
face of the mighty One from generation to generation. Nor shall they now
fear disgrace.

4. Woe to you, sinners, when you die in your sins; and they, who are
like you, say respecting you, Blessed are these sinners. They have lived
out their whole period;[287] and now they die in happiness[288] and in
wealth. Distress and slaughter they knew not[289] while alive; in honour
they die; nor ever in their lifetime did judgment overtake them.

5. _But_ has it not been shown to them, that, _when_ to the receptacle
of the dead their souls shall be made to descend, their evil deeds shall
become their greatest torment? Into darkness, into the snare, and into
the flame, which shall burn to the great judgment, shall their spirits
enter; and the great judgment shall take effect for ever and for
ever.[290]

6. Woe to you; for to you there shall be no peace. Neither can you say
to the righteous, and to the good who are alive, In the days of our
trouble have we been afflicted; every _species of_ trouble have we seen,
and many evil things have suffered.[291]

7. Our spirits have been consumed, lessened, and diminished.

8. We have perished; nor has there been a possibility of help for us in
word or in deed: we have found none, but have been tormented and
destroyed.

9. We have not expected to live[292] day after day.

10. We hoped indeed to have been the head;

11. But we have become the tail. We have been afflicted, when we have
exerted ourselves; but we have been devoured by sinners[293] and the
ungodly; their yoke has been heavy upon us.

12. Those have exercised dominion over us who detest and who goad us;
and to those who hate us have we humbled our neck; but they have shown
no compassion towards us.

13. We have been desirous of escaping from them, that we might fly away
and be at rest; but we have found no place to which we could fly, and be
secure from them. We have sought an asylum with princes in our distress,
and have cried out to those who were devouring us; but our cry has not
been regarded, nor have they been disposed to hear our voice;

14. But rather to assist those who plunder and devour us; those who
diminish us, and hide their oppression; who remove not their yoke from
us, but devour, enervate, and slay us; who conceal our slaughter, nor
remember that they have lifted up their hands against us.

Footnote 286:

  _in righteousness and in much goodness._

Footnote 287:

  _They have seen all their days._

Footnote 288:

  _in goodness._

Footnote 289:

  _they saw not._

Footnote 290:

  _shall be for every generation, even for ever._

Footnote 291:

  _found._

Footnote 292:

  _to see life._

Footnote 293:

  _food for sinners._




                               CHAP. CIV.


1. I swear to you, ye righteous, that in heaven the angels record your
goodness before the glory of the mighty One.

2. Wait with patient hope; for formerly you have been disgraced with
evil and with affliction; but now shall you shine like the luminaries of
heaven. You shall be seen, and the gates of heaven shall be opened to
you. Your cries have cried for judgment; and it has appeared to you: for
an account of all your sufferings shall be required from the princes,
and from every one who has assisted your plunderers.

3. Wait with patient hope; nor relinquish your confidence; for great joy
shall be yours, like that of the angels in heaven. Conduct yourselves as
you may, still you shall not be concealed in the day of the great
judgment. You shall not be found like sinners; and eternal condemnation
shall be far from you, so long as the world exists.[294]

4. And now fear not, ye righteous, when you see sinners flourishing and
prosperous[295] in their ways.

5. Be not associates with them; but keep yourselves at a distance from
their oppression; be you associated with the host of heaven. You, ye
sinners, say, All our transgressions shall not be taken account of, and
be recorded. But all your transgressions shall be recorded daily.

6. And be assured by me,[296] that light and darkness, day and night,
behold all your transgressions. Be not impious in your thoughts; lie
not; surrender not the word of uprightness; lie not against the word of
the holy and the mighty One; glorify not your idols; for all your lying
and all your impiety is not for righteousness, but for great crime.

7. Now will I point out a mystery: Many sinners shall turn and
transgress against the word of uprightness.

8. They shall speak evil things; they shall utter falsehood; execute
great undertakings;[297] and compose books in their own words. But when
they shall write all my words correctly in their own languages,

9. They shall neither change or diminish them; but shall write them all
correctly; all which from the first I have uttered concerning them.

10. Another mystery also I point out. To the righteous and the wise
shall be given books of joy, of integrity, and of great wisdom. To them
shall books be given, in which they shall believe;

11. And in which they shall rejoice. And all the righteous shall be
rewarded, who from these shall acquire the knowledge of every upright
path.

Footnote 294:

  _during every generation of the world._

Footnote 295:

  _strong and worthy._

Footnote 296:

  _I will show you._

Footnote 297:

  _create a great creation._




                            CHAP. CIV.[298]


1. In those days, saith the Lord, they shall call to the children of the
earth, and make them listen to their wisdom. Show them that you are
their leaders;

2. And that renumeration _shall take place_ over the whole earth; for I
and my Son will for ever hold communion with them in the paths of
uprightness, while they are still alive.[299] Peace shall be yours.
Rejoice, children of integrity, in the truth.

Footnote 298:

  This chapter occurs twice.

Footnote 299:

  _we will for ever mix with them in the paths of uprightness in their
  lives._




                               CHAP. CV.


1. After a time,[300] my son Mathusala took a wife for his son Lamech.

2. She became pregnant by him, and brought forth a child, the flesh of
which was as white as snow, and red as a rose; the hair of whose head
was white like wool, and long; and whose eyes were beautiful. When he
opened them, he illuminated all the house, like the sun; the whole house
abounded with light.

3. And when he was taken from the hand of the midwife, opening also his
mouth, he spoke to the Lord of righteousness. Then Lamech his father was
afraid of him; and flying away came to his own father Mathusala, and
said, I have begotten a son, unlike _to other children_.[301] He is not
human; but, resembling the offspring of the angels of heaven, is of a
different nature _from ours_, being altogether unlike to us.

4. His eyes are _bright_ as the rays of the sun; his countenance
glorious, and he looks not as if he belonged to me, but to the angels.

5. I am afraid, lest something miraculous should take place on earth in
his days.

6. And now, my father, let me entreat and request you to go to our
progenitor Enoch, and to learn from him the truth; for his residence is
with the angels.

7. When Mathusala heard the words of his son, he came to me at the
extremities of the earth; for he had been informed that I was there: and
he cried out.

8. I heard his voice, and went to him saying, Behold, I am _here_, my
son; since thou art come to me.

9. He answered and said, On account of a great event have I come to
thee; and on account of a sight difficult _to be comprehended_ have I
approached thee.

10. And now, my father, hear me; for to my son Lamech a child has been
born, who resembles not him; and whose nature is not like the nature of
man. His colour is whiter than snow; he is redder than the rose; the
hair of his head is whiter than white wool; his eyes are like the rays
of the sun; and when he opened them he illuminated the whole house.

11. When also he was taken from the hand of the midwife, he opened his
mouth, and blessed the Lord of heaven.

12. His father Lamech feared, and fled to me, believing not that _the
child_ belonged to him, but that he resembled the angels of heaven. And
behold I am come to thee, that thou mightest point out to me the truth.

13. Then I, Enoch, answered and said, The Lord will effect a new thing
upon the earth. This have I explained, and seen in a vision. I have
shown thee that _in_ the generations of Jared my father, those who were
from heaven disregarded the word of the Lord. Behold they committed
crimes; laid aside their class, and intermingled with women. With them
also they transgressed; married with them, and begot children.

14. A great destruction therefore shall come upon all the earth; a
deluge, a great destruction, shall take place in one year.

15. This child which is born to you shall survive on the earth, and his
three sons shall be saved with him. When all mankind who are on earth
shall die, he shall be safe.

16. And his posterity shall beget on the earth giants, not spiritual,
but carnal. Upon the earth shall a great punishment be inflicted, and it
shall be washed from all corruption. Now therefore inform thy son
Lamech, that he who is born is his child in truth; and he shall call his
name _Noah_, for he shall be to you a survivor. He and his children
shall be saved from the corruption which shall take place in the world;
from all the sin and from all the iniquity which shall be consummated on
earth in his days. Afterwards shall greater impiety take place than that
which had been before consummated on the earth; for I am acquainted with
holy mysteries, which the Lord himself has discovered and explained to
me; and which I have read in the tablets of heaven.

17. In them I saw it written, that generation after generation shall
transgress, until a righteous race shall arise; until transgression and
crime perish from off the earth; until all goodness come upon it.

18. And now, my son, go tell thy son Lamech,

19. That the child which is born is his child in truth; and that there
is no deception.

20. When Mathusala heard the word of his father Enoch, who had shown him
every secret thing, he returned with understanding,[302] and called the
name of that child Noah; because he was to console the earth on account
of all its destruction.

21. Another book, which Enoch wrote for his son Mathusala, and for those
who should come after him, and preserve their purity of conduct[303] in
the latter days. You, who have laboured, shall wait in those days, until
the evil doers be consumed, and the power of the guilty be annihilated.
Wait, until sin pass away; for their names shall be blotted out of the
holy books; their seed shall be destroyed, and their spirits slain. They
shall cry out and lament in the invisible waste, and in the bottomless
fire shall they burn.[304] There I perceived, as it were, a cloud which
could not be seen through; for from the depth of it I was unable to look
upwards. I beheld also a flame of fire blazing brightly, and, as it
were, glittering mountains whirled around, and agitated from side to
side.

22. Then I inquired of one of the holy angels who was with me, and said,
What is this splendid _object_? For it is not heaven, but a flame of
fire alone which blazes; and _in it there is_ the clamour of
exclamation, of woe, and of great suffering.

23. He said, There, into that place which thou beholdest, shall be
thrust the spirits of sinners and blasphemers; of those who shall do
evil, and who shall pervert all which God has spoken by the mouth of the
prophets; all which they ought to do.

For respecting these things there shall be writings and impressions
above in heaven, that the angels may read them and know what shall
happen both to sinners and to the spirits of the humble; to those who
have suffered in their bodies, but have been rewarded by God; who have
been injuriously treated by wicked men; who have loved God; who have
been attached neither to gold nor silver, nor to any good thing in the
world, but have given their bodies to torment;

24. To those who from the period of their birth[305] have not been
covetous of earthly riches; but have regarded themselves as a breath
passing away.

25. Such has been their conduct;[306] and much has the Lord tried them;
and their spirits have been found pure, that they might bless his name.
All their blessings have I related in a book; and He has rewarded them;
for they have been found to love heaven with an everlasting aspiration.
_God has said_, While they have been trodden down by wicked men, they
have heard from them revilings and blasphemies; and have been
ignominiously treated, while they were blessing me. And now will I call
the spirits of the good from the generation of light, and will change
those who have been born in darkness; who have not in their bodies been
recompensed with glory, as their faith may have merited.

26. I will bring them into the splendid light of those who love my holy
name: and I will place each of them on a throne of glory, of glory
_peculiarly_ his own, and they shall be at rest during unnumbered
periods. Righteous is the judgment of God;

27. For to the faithful shall he give faith in the habitations of
uprightness.[307] They shall see those, who having been born in darkness
unto darkness shall be cast; while the righteous shall be at rest.
Sinners shall cry out, beholding them, while they exist in splendour and
proceed forwards to the days and periods prescribed to them.[308]

    Here ends the vision of Enoch the prophet. May the benediction of
    his prayer, and the gift of his appointed period, be with his
    beloved! Amen.

Footnote 300:

  _after days._

Footnote 301:

  _a changed son._

Footnote 302:

  _seeing._

Footnote 303:

  _their state of life._

Footnote 304:

  _in the fire shall they burn, where there is no earth._

Footnote 305:

  _from the time they were._

Footnote 306:

  _And this have they kept._

Footnote 307:

  _of upright ways._

Footnote 308:

  _written down for them._


PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).
    ○ Footnotes have been moved to follow the chapters in which they are
      referenced.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF ENOCH THE PROPHET ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



